Introduction The venomous snake, one of the most dangerous animals, is widely found in the world, especially in tropical regions 1 . Among all, the most venomous snakes are Elapidae (elapids) and Viperidae (viperids or vipers), which produce neurotoxins and myotoxic agents, respectively 2 . As such, the Elapids, such as Naja kaouthia (NK; cobra) and Ophiophagus hannah (OH; king cobra), have permanent front fangs, whereas the vipers, including Dabonia russellii (DR; Russell's viper) and Trimeresurus albolabris (TA; green pit viper), have retractable front fangs for venom ejection. While snake venoms contain numerous bioactive proteins that exhibit cytotoxicity toward several cells, including neuron cells, hematological cells, and myocytes 2 , several molecules from snake venoms are the new candidates for modern medicine treatment 3 . For example, antihypertensive bradykinin (vasodilator peptide) from South American pit viper 4 , anti-fibrinogen (thrombin-like serine protease) for ischemic stroke from Brazilian pit viper 5 , 6 , and anti-platelet from three-finger toxin (3FTx) of Indian cobra 7 . For antimicrobial activity, various proteinaceous compounds in snake venoms are antimicrobials 2 against multiple organisms ( Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Candida albicans, and Staphylococcus aureus ) through phospholipase A2 (PLA2) and l -amino acid oxidase (LAAO) from Lebanon viper 8 and antimicrobial peptide (Cathelicidin) for multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii and methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) from king cobra snake 9 . Biofilms are the alteration from a free-living (planktonic) form of bacteria into a sessile form with self-secreted exopolysaccharide (EPS) protecting organisms from most of the antimicrobial agents as one of the antibiotic resistance mechanisms 10 . Interestingly, there are several anti-biofilms from snake venoms 11 , 12 , including the prevention of A. baumannii biofilms by Caatinga lancehead snake-isolated PLA2 12 , and S. aureus biofilm eradication by C-type lectin purified from Bothrops jararacussu (a South American pit viper) 11 . However, data on the anti-biofilms from snake venoms are still very less, especially against P. aeruginosa . Biofilms from either Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria induce antibiotic resistance, and biofilm prevention and eradication are clinically useful, especially in patients with indwelling catheters 13 , 14 . Although anti-biofilms toward multi-organisms are easy for the clinical use, anti-biofilms against an individual organism demonstrated clearer mechanistic actions due to the different mechanisms of biofilm production for different microbes. Because P. aeruginosa infection is an emerging health-care problem among several biofilm-producing pathogens, partly due to the effective biofilm formation in several strains, that is demonstrated in several chronic infections (cystic fibrosis, catheter-induced infection, and chronic wounds) 15 , anti- Pseudomonas biofilms might be beneficial. The exopolysaccharides (EPS) of Pseudomonas biofilms consist of alginate, d -mannuronic acid, l -guluronic acid polysaccharide, and PSL which is a neutral pentasaccharide subunit containing mannose, rhamnose, and glucose controlled by the polysaccharide synthesis locus ( psl ) gene 16 . The embedment of sessile-formed bacteria into these biofilm substances is responsible for antimicrobial resistance, despite the in vitro susceptibility to antibiotics in the planktonic bacterial form 17 . In patients with retained catheters (urinary, venous, peritoneal, and hemodialysis catheters), biofilms cause several episodes of infection with increased morbidity and mortality 13 , 18 . Because of profound polysaccharide components in biofilms and the possible carbohydrate digestibility of enzymes, surface-bound glycoside hydrolase enzymes prevent PSL attachment on the catheter surface and are effective for Pseudomonas biofilm prevention 19 . However, snake venoms are fascinating sources of powerful enzymes that might act on the mature biofilms, especially for catheter lock solutions in several indwelling catheters 20 and adjunctive antimicrobial agents. Here, we evaluated the anti-biofilm effect of snake venoms commonly found in Thailand and identified the possible effective enzyme against Pseudomonas biofilms that might be clinically beneficial. Results Antimicrobial properties of crude snake venoms, especially O. hannah (king cobra) and T. albolabris (green pit viper), as a broad-spectrum antimicrobial Because the antimicrobial effect plays a crucial role in biofilm eradication (eradication of the dispersed cells), we screened antimicrobial properties of the venoms from Thai common snakes, including Naja kaouthia (NK; cobra), Ophiophagus hannah (OH; king cobra), Dabonia russellii (DR; Russell’s viper), and Trimeresurus albolabris (TA; green pit viper). As such, the in vitro antimicrobial activities, including the minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) and the minimum bactericidal concentrations (MBCs), were performed against Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. The maximum concentration of crude venoms was 0.25 mg/mL to avoid the profound dilution of bacterial media (too much dilution of bacterial broth) (see “ Methods ” Section). As such, OH and TA venoms exhibited bacterial inhibitions against all selected P. aeruginosa isolates (MIC range between 0.06 and 0.25 mg/mL) (Table 1 ). In contrast, most venoms did not inhibit Escherichia coli ATCC 25922 (MIC > 0.25 mg/mL). Among Gram-positive bacteria, the growth of most S. aureus strains was interfered with all four venoms (MIC range 0.0038 to 0.25 mg/mL). All selected snake venoms did not affect Enterococcus faecalis (MIC > 0.25 mg/mL), and only OH and TA venoms had bactericidal activities against P. aeruginosa (MBC range 0.06 to 0.25 mg/mL). Additionally, all venoms exhibited bactericidal effects on S. aureus (MBC range 0.0038 to 0.25 mg/mL). Therefore, most snake venoms were effective against S. aureus. The venoms from OH and TA were categorized as broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents against both Gram-positive ( S. aureus ) and Gram-negative bacteria ( P. aeruginosa ). Table 1 Antimicrobial, anti-biofilm, and biofilm eradication activities of crude snake venoms, including Naja kaouthia (NK), Ophiophagus hannah (OH), Dabonia russellii (DR), Trimeresurus albolabris (TA) venoms. Full size table Crude snake venoms exhibited anti-biofilm activity and partially destroyed the established biofilms Due to the effect on both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, OH and TA venoms were further tested for anti-biofilm activities (inhibition of biofilm formation) as determined by the minimum biofilm inhibitory concentrations (MBICs). As such, OH and TA venoms at the MIC (1 × MIC) or twofold higher (2 × MIC), identical to the MBIC range between 0.06 to 0.25 mg/mL, were adequate to prevent Pseudomonas biofilm (incubated venoms together with P. aeruginosa ) (Table 1 ). Moreover, OH and TA venoms inhibited the biofilms of S. aureus ATCC 29213 (MBIC = 0.0038 mg/mL). Notably, the venoms without the antimicrobial effect did not exhibit anti-biofilm formation, especially in E. coli ATCC 25922 and three E. faecalis isolates (Table 1 ). Therefore, the biofilm prevention effect of OH and TA venoms against P. aeruginosa was mainly due to antimicrobial activities. Subsequently, to test the ability of snake venoms to eliminate biofilms (administration of venoms onto the preformed biofilms) as indicated by the minimum biofilm eradication concentrations (MBECs) were determined using bacterial-preformed biofilms in 96-well culture plates. Although all venoms had no biofilm eradication effect at the MBECs higher than 0.25 mg/mL, OH venom prominently decreased preformed biofilms from all P. aeruginosa isolates, including P. aeruginosa ATCC 27853 and P. aeruginosa strain PAO1 (PAO1) (the standard strains used for biofilm studies) together with the clinical-isolated P. aeruginosa (PACL) and chlorhexidine-treated clinical isolated P. aeruginosa (C_PACL) (Supplementary Figs. S1 – S4 ). In contrast, there was no biofilm disruption effect of TA venom against the preformed biofilm of these Pseudomonas spp. (Supplementary Figs. S2 – S4 ). Because OH venom was the most effective antimicrobial and anti-biofilm against P. aeruginosa , OH venom was further investigated for mechanistic experiments. King cobra venom ( O. hannah ) reduced P. aeruginosa extracellular polysaccharides, (alginate and PSL), partly through the regulation on algU / mucA and gacA. Because P. aeruginosa PAO1 (a standard strain) and PACL (a clinically isolated strain) prominently produced biofilms than other selected strains, these strains were further tested with the sub-MIC level of OH venom (50% lower than the MIC level; 0.5 × MIC) in 6 h and 24 h biofilms. As such, crude OH-venom at 0.5 × MIC (0.125 mg/mL) reduced biofilms of PAO1 and PACL (Fig. 1 A–C) partly through the down-regulated algD and pslB , the encoded genes for alginate and PSL, respectively, at 6 or 24 h biofilms (Fig. 1 D–G). Alginate component in Pseudomonas EPS is controlled by AlgU/MucA complex as the binding of MucA protein on the outer membrane (a negative regulator) with the sigma factor AlgU impeding alginate synthesis (Fig. 2 A). Interestingly, the crude OH venom downregulated algU (Fig. 2 B) and mucA (Fig. 2 D) in 6 h sessile P. aeruginosa PAO1, without effect on PACL (Fig. 2 C,E), indicating a decrease in alginate production, possibly through AlgU inhibition in early-stage biofilm in a strain-dependent manner. Meanwhile, the PSL component of Pseudomonas EPS is regulated by the psl operon with GacSA/RsmA regulators (Fig. 2 A), and OH venom downregulated gacA in both early (6 h) and mature (24 h) biofilms of P. aeruginosa PAO1 and PACL (Fig. 2 F–G). Hence, crude OH venom demonstrated the bactericidal impact on planktonic P. aeruginosa (Table 1 ) with anti-biofilm activities partly through downregulated genes in the alginate and PSL component syntheses (Figs. 1 and 2 ). Figure 1 Anti-biofilm activities of crude king cobra venom (OH) against P. aeruginosa reference strain (PAO1) and clinical strain (PACL). The intensities of crystal violet stain from 24 h biofilms of P. aeruginosa PAO1 and clinically isolated strain (PACL) cultured with crude OH venoms with representative biofilm pictures in 96-well polystyrene plates stained with crystal violet are demonstrated ( A – C ). The expressions of genes encoding for alginate and PSL synthesis ( D – G ) including algD ( D , F ) and pslB ( E , G ), as determined in 6 h and 24 h biofilms of P. aeruginosa cultured with crude OH venom (at sub-MIC level, avoiding the lethal effect of the venom) by qRT-PCR, are demonstrated. The experiments were performed in independent triplicate. Mean ± SEM is presented with the paired t- test analysis (* p ˂ 0.05). Full size image Figure 2 Crude king cobra venom (OH) reduced the production of alginate and PSL of P. aeruginosa reference strain (PAO1) and clinical strain (PACL) through the down-regulation of several genes. Diagram of extracellular polysaccharide (EPS, including alginate and PSL) productions ( A ) in P. aeruginosa , including (i) MucA inactivation by external stress resulting in the release of free sigma factor AlgU to switch on alginate synthesis operon, (ii) c-di-GMP-dependent PSL synthesis via activation of a diguanylate cyclase (SiaD) and c-di-GMP-independent pathway using rsmZ (regulated by GacA regulator). Gene expression profiles in P. aeruginosa PAO1 and P. aeruginosa clinical isolated strain (PACL) biofilms cultured with crude OH venom (at sub-MIC level, avoiding lethal effect of the venom) in alginate production, including algU ( B , C ) and mucA ( D , E ), and PSL production ( gacA ) ( F , G ) as determined by qRT-PCR are demonstrated (the experiments were performed in independent triplicate). Mean ± SEM is presented with the paired t- test analysis (* p ˂0.05). Full size image l -amino acid oxidase from O. hannah venom (OH-LAAO) as a potential active substance for antimicrobial and anti-biofilm activities against P. aeruginosa The crude OH venom was purified by three-step chromatography (see “ Methods ” Section). The first step was the analytical gel filtration using the Sephadex G-75 column chromatography (Fig. 3 A), exploring the effective fractions. Among 5-peaks of the eluted proteins, peak-1 elution demonstrated the most prominent bactericidal activity against P. aeruginosa PAO1 and PACL (MIC and MBC at 10 µg/mL) (Table 2 ) that also showed the most prominent anti-biofilm effect on 24 h biofilms (biofilm prevention experiments) (Fig. 3 B–E) and 24 h-established biofilms (biofilm eradication experiments) (Fig. 3 F–I), implying biofilm prevention and biofilm detachment properties. These results suggested that antimicrobial, anti-biofilms, and biofilm eradication effects of OH venom were in the peak-1 elution from the first step of purification. Figure 3 The active peak-1 fraction of crude king cobra venom (OH) with anti-biofilm activity. After the first step of purification using the Sephadex G-75 column chromatography, 5 peaks of crude OH venom are demonstrated, including ( A ). peak-1 (fraction 5–6), peak-2 (fraction 8), peak-3 (fraction 9–10), peak-4 (fraction 11–14), and peak-5 (fraction 20–22) of purified OH venom were collected. The intensities of crystal violet-stained biofilms at 24 h of P. aeruginosa PAO1 and P. aeruginosa clinically isolated strain (PACL) cultured with each peak of purified OH venoms (5 µg/mL) and the representative 96-well polystyrene plates are demonstrated ( B – E ). Likewise, the intensities of crystal violet stain from the 24 h-preformed biofilms of P. aeruginosa PAO1 and PACL cultured with each peak of purified OH venoms (10 µg/mL) with the representative 96-well polystyrene plates are demonstrated ( F – I ). The experiments were performed in independent triplicate). Mean ± SEM is presented with the one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s analysis (* p ˂ 0.05). After purification using a three-step purification (3-column chromatography), the purified OH-LAAO is demonstrated in SDS-PAGE ( J ). The amino acid sequences of purified OH-LAAO ( K ). The results showed 52% coverage of purified OH-LAAO with l -amino-acid oxidase of O. hannah (UniProt database: P81383). The matched peptides are demonstrated in red and bold characters. Full size image Table 2 Antimicrobial, anti-biofilm, and biofilm eradication activities of Ophiophagus hannah (OH) elution peak-1 to peak-5 from the first step purification using the Sephadex G-75 column chromatography and purified OH- l -amino acid oxidase (LAAO) from the three-step purification. Full size table Additionally, the specific LAAO activity from these 5 peaks was remarkedly observed only in peak-1 (11.17 ± 1.31 U/mg) (Supplementary Fig. S5 ). In the second step, the peak-1 elution from the Sephadex G-75 column chromatography was separated and purified for LAAO enzyme using the Resource Q column chromatography, which showed 3 peaks of the elution (Supplementary Fig. S6 ). The peak-1 eluted from the Resource Q column demonstrated a remarkable LAAO activity at 15.99 ± 1.18 U/mg (Supplementary Fig. S7 ). The last step of purification used the HiTrap™ Heparin column chromatography (see “ Methods ” Section), which showed two peaks of the elution (Supplementary Fig. S8 ). The highest LAAO activity was observed in the peak-1 elution at 21.72 ± 1.39 U/mg (Supplementary Fig. S9 ). In summary, using the three-step purification provided a significantly higher specific activity of LAAO (Supplementary Fig. S10 and Table S2 ) for further experiments. Then, an approximately 65 kDa protein dominant in the peak-1 elution from the last step purification using the HiTrap™ Heparin column chromatography (Fig. 3 J) was identified by N -terminal amino acid sequence using nano-High Performance Liquid Chromatography (nano-HPLC) mass spectrometry and database search (see “ Methods ” Section). The purified OH-LAAO was matched with LAAO submitted in the UniProt database (UniProt database: P81383) by 52% of LAAO amino acid sequences (Fig. 3 K). The purified OH-LAAO (approximately 65 kDa) had a higher molecular weight of LAAO in the database (P81383) (55.977 kDa), indicating the post-translation modification (glycosylation) 21 , 22 of OH-LAAO in our study. Therefore, the purified venom from the HiTrap™ Heparin column was further used as OH-derived LAAO (OH-LAAO). After purification, OH-LAAO showed increased antimicrobial activities against P. aeruginosa PAO1 and PACL with 5 and 10 µg/mL of MICs and MBCs, respectively (Table 2 ), and 10 µg/mL of purified OH-LAAO exhibited a prominent anti-biofilm effect (Table 2 ). Subsequently, the impacts of the purified OH-LAAO against P. aeruginosa biofilms were investigated. As such, 2.5 µg/mL of purified OH-LAAO (0.5 × MIC) downregulated algD in PAO1 and PACL (planktonic and sessile forms), while pslB was downregulated only in sessile but not planktonic cells, and algU was downregulated in sessile forms (Fig. 4 A–F). Similar to pslB downregulation, gacA , and rsmZ , a small RNA downstream transcribed by the GacA system, were downregulated (Fig. 4 G–J). Additionally, expression of siaD that encoded diguanylate cyclase for c-di-GMP production, a positive PSL regulator, was depleted in PAO1 and PACL (Fig. 4 K–L). Figure 4 Prevention of biofilm synthesis by l -amino acid oxidase from O. hannah venom (OH-LAAO). Gene expression profiles in planktonic (non-biofilm) and sessile (biofilm) forms of P. aeruginosa PAO1 and P. aeruginosa clinically isolated strain (PACL) biofilms cultured with OH-LAAO (at sub-MIC level, avoiding lethal effect) in alginate ( algD ) ( A , B ) and PSL productions ( pslB ) ( C , D ), and the regulators, including algU ( E , F ), gacA ( G , H ), rsmZ ( I , J ), and siaD ( K , L ), as determined by qRT-PCR are demonstrated (the experiments were performed in independent triplicate). Mean ± SEM is presented with the paired t- test analysis (* p ˂ 0.05). Full size image In the biofilm eradication experiments (24 h-preformed biofilms), the purified OH-LAAO downregulated algD , pslB , gacA , rsmZ , and siaD in both PAO1 and PACL, but downregulated fleQ (a flagellar regulator gene) only in PACL (Fig. 5 A–F), indicating a possible biofilm erosion through reduced c-di-GMP (on both PAO1 and PACL) and decreased motility (on PACL) as one of the anti-biofilm mechanisms. Therefore, the anti- Pseudomonas biofilms of purified OH-LAAO were demonstrated through the reduced synthesis of both alginate and PSL components of biofilms, especially the GacA/ rsmZ and c-di-GMP-related mechanisms. Figure 5 Eradication of the preformed biofilms by l -amino acid oxidase from O. hannah venom (OH-LAAO). Gene expression profiles in 24 h preformed biofilms of P. aeruginosa PAO1 and P. aeruginosa clinically isolated strain (PACL) after incubation with OH-LAAO (at the MIC level) in alginate, algD ( A ), and PSL productions pslB ( B ), and the regulators, including gacA ( C ), rsmZ ( D ), siaD ( E ), and fleQ (an encoding transcriptional regulator controlling gene of flagellum) ( F ), as determined by qRT-PCR are demonstrated (the experiments were performed in independent triplicate). Mean ± SEM is presented with the paired t- test analysis (* p ˂ 0.05). Full size image l -amino acid oxidase from O. hannah venom (OH-LAAO) demonstrated antimicrobial and anti-biofilm activities mediated by H 2 O 2 production As one of the hydrolysis enzymes, OH-LAAO induces several metabolites, including 2-oxocarboxylate, ammonium (NH 4 + ), and hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), from the substrate ( l -amino acids) (Fig. 6 A). With the incubation of OH-LAAO with either l -lysine or l -arginine, there was an increased antimicrobial impact against PAO1 planktonic compared to OH-LAAO alone, as indicated by the growth inhibition plate and time-kill assays (Fig. 6 B–C). The antimicrobial property of OH-LAAO was neutralized by catalase (an H 2 O 2 decomposing enzyme) (Fig. 6 D–E). Likewise, catalase also neutralized the anti-biofilm effect of OH-LAAO as determined by crystal violet staining and the rescue of several biofilm-associated genes (including algD , pslB , algU , gacA , and siaD ) in PAO1 or PACL with some differences between these strains (Fig. 7 A–G). In P. aeruginosa , environment sensing proteins (NbdA) recognize several activators, including nitric oxide (NO) and O 2 , that promote several phosphodiesterase enzymes (PDEs) (BdlA and DipA) for c-di-GMP degradation and enhanced biofilm matrix-degrading enzymes, including EndA and PslG, the hydrolyzer against extracellular DNA (eDNA), and PSL hydrolyzer, respectively, resulting in biofilm dispersion (a natural process for the biofilm biomass reduction) 23 (Fig. 8 A). As such, OH-LAAO promoted biofilm dispersion through the enhanced expression of nbdA , bdlA , dipA , endA , and pslG but was neutralized by catalase (Fig. 8 B–F), suggesting a H 2 O 2 -mediated mechanism on NbdA/BdlA/DipA axis (the activation of EndA and PslG; matrix-degrading enzymes). These data implied a crucial role of the enzyme metabolites, especially H 2 O 2 , in the antimicrobial and anti-biofilm properties of OH-LAAO. Figure 6 Antimicrobial activity of l -amino acid oxidase from O. hannah venom (OH-LAAO), a hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 )-dependent mechanism. Diagram of l -amino acid oxidase (LAAO) enzymatic reaction ( A ), the growth inhibition plate assay (in graph and the representative picture) ( B , C ), and the time-kill assay ( D ) using OH-LAAO (0.025–0.1 µg/spot) with or without the substrates ( l -arginine and l -lysine at 2.5 mM/spot) against P. aeruginosa PAO1 are demonstrated. Also, an effect of catalase, a hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) decomposer, with either crude OH venom or OH-LAAO in P. aeruginosa PAO1 and P. aeruginosa clinical isolated strain (PACL) microbicidal activity ( E ) are also indicated. All experiments were performed in triplicate. The data are presented as mean ± SEM with the one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s analysis (* p ˂ 0.05 and # p < 0.05). Full size image Figure 7 Anti-biofilm activity of l -amino acid oxidase from O. hannah venom (OH-LAAO), a hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 )-dependent mechanism. The intensities of crystal violet stain from 24 h biofilms of P. aeruginosa PAO1 and P. aeruginosa clinically isolated strain (PACL) cultured with OH-LAAO with or without catalase with the representative biofilm pictures in 96-well polystyrene plates stained with crystal violet are demonstrated ( A , B ). Gene expression profiles in sessile cells of P. aeruginosa PAO1 and PACL cultured with OH-LAAO with or without catalase in alginate ( algD ) ( C ) and PSL productions ( pslB ) ( D ), and the regulators, including algU ( E ), gacA ( F ), and siaD ( G ), determined by qRT-PCR are also demonstrated (the experiments were performed in independent triplicate). Mean ± SEM is presented with the one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s analysis (* p ˂ 0.05). Full size image Figure 8 Biofilm dispersion activity of l -amino acid oxidase from O. hannah venom (OH-LAAO), a hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 )-dependent mechanism. A diagram of biofilm dispersion in P. aeruginosa that external stimulation factors (including nitric oxide; NO) activate NbdA (NO-induced biofilm dispersion) to promote chemotaxis protein (BdlA) that stimulates phosphodiesterase enzymes (DipA and RbdA), resulting in a decreased c-di-GMP level and enhancement biofilm matrix-degrading enzymes (EndA and PslG) ( A ). The expression of biofilm dispersion-related genes, including nbdA ( B ), bdlA ( C ), and dipA ( D ) with the genes of biofilm matrix-degrading enzymes, including endA ( E ) and pslG ( F ), determined by qRT-PCR, with OH-LAAO incubation with or without catalase on the preformed biofilms of P. aeruginosa PAO1 and P. aeruginosa clinical isolated strain (PACL) are demonstrated (the experiments were performed in independent triplicate). Mean ± SEM is presented with the one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s analysis (* p ˂ 0.05 considered statistically significant). Full size image Discussion Antimicrobial and anti-biofilm of l -amino acid oxidase from O. hannah venom (OH-LAAO) mediated by H 2 O 2 metabolite against P. aeruginosa biofilms The composition of crude snake venoms depends on species (interspecies variation) 2 , 24 and geological habitat (intraspecies variation) 2 , 25 as 3FTx of king cobra venom (OH) in Indonesia and Malaysia is 60% and 31% of the substances, respectively 2 , 26 , while PLA2 of Malaysian and Thai cobra (NK) is 24%, and 16% of the total compounds, respectively 2 , 26 , 27 . Hence, the isolation or synthesis of the active molecules from snake venoms can overcome this variation 2 , 28 . Here, E. coli and E. faecalis were resistant to most venoms 29 , 30 , as these bacteria can be isolated from venoms 31 and some snakebite wounds 32 , indicating a possible natural resistance from the microbial evolution 33 . However, P. aeruginosa , the minor microbiota in snake oral cavity 34 with biofilm production property 10 and pathogenicity 35 , was susceptible to several snake venoms, especially king cobra venoms (OH). Although both OH and TA venoms exhibited broad spectrum antimicrobial activities as indicated by the MICs and MBCs (Table 1 ), OH venom had a more prominent eradication against Pseudomonas biofilms (Supplementary Figs. S1 – S4 ). Although the venoms from all selected snakes and the purified OH-LAAO could not entirely eradicate biofilms as indicated by the high MBEC levels (Tables 1 and 2 ), the venoms and OH-LAAO demonstrated some impacts on biofilms as indicated by the acceptable MBIC values. Indeed, l -amino acid oxidase (LAAOs), an enzyme produced by many living organisms 36 , was identified as a potentially effective compound of OH venom with antimicrobial and anti-biofilm properties, partly through hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) production. Although LAAOs have various l -amino acid substrates, especially l -leucine 37 , 38 , LAAO from the king cobra (OH-LAAO) seems to be very specific to l -lysine and l -arginine 39 , 40 . Indeed, snake LAAOs rapidly and strongly produce more H 2 O 2 than human LAAOs (encoded by interleukin-4-induced gene 1, IL4I1 ), but the human LAAOs induced higher indole-3-pyruvate (I3P) that promotes cancer survival 41 . Due to the differences in LAAOs between snakes and other hosts, l -lysine and l -arginine which were possibly more specific to OH-LAAO were used in this study. Despite H 2 O 2 neutralization by several anti-oxidants in most of the living cells 42 , LAAO from venomous animals produces high H 2 O 2 to induce damage in most cells 36 , 43 . Because H 2 O 2 -mediated cell surface injury can overcome gene-mediated antibiotic resistance, engineering LAAOs specific to bacterial cells are interesting for combating pan-drug-resistant bacteria, especially against P. aeruginosa , with a less adverse effect on the host’s cells. Notably, sub-lethal OH-LAAO was used in our anti-biofilm experiments to avoid interference from microbicidal activity, then the demonstrable anti-biofilm property should be a direct effect on anti-biofilms, but not a simple antimicrobial activity. Although several sub-lethal stress (oxidative stress, H 2 O 2 , and ultraviolet A) can also enhance alginate and PSL production in P. aeruginosa biofilms 44 , 45 , H 2 O 2 levels from OH-LAAO might be high enough to induce bacterial adverse effects. Likewise, LAAO benefits on Pseudomonas biofilms are also supported by Escapin (LAAO derived from the ink of sea hares) through H 2 O 2 generation with several intermediate products 46 . l -amino acid oxidase from O. hannah venom (OH-LAAO) versus several gene-associated P. aeruginosa biofilms In harsh environments, Pseudomonas biofilm synthesis is initiated by i) alginate synthesis through alg operon expression from the release of sigma factor ( algU ) from mucA (an algU negative regulator) and ii) PSL production from psl operon activation (a c-di-GMP dependent process) through diguanylate cyclase ( siaD ) and gacA (transcriptional regulator)/ rsmZ (non-coding small RNA) pathway 47 , 48 . Here, OH-LAAO inhibited biofilm production in H 2 O 2 dependent manner, and the effect was neutralized by catalase (an H 2 O 2 neutralizing enzyme) as concluded in Fig. 9 (left side). Moreover, OH-LAAO attenuated the 24 h pre-formed biofilm, partly through induced biofilm dispersion (the reduced biofilm biomass through the conversion from sessile into planktonic bacteria that are separated from the biofilms 23 ). The biofilm dispersion is initiated by nbdA (activated regulatory sensor) that triggers phosphodiesterases ( bdlA and dipA ) to digest c-di-GMP for inducing degradation of extracellular DNA (eDNA) and PSL (the important biofilm components) through endonuclease A and matrix-degrading enzyme ( pslG ), respectively 23 . Indeed, OH-LAAO promoted biofilm dispersion (Fig. 8 ), which was neutralized by catalase, suggesting a H 2 O 2 -dependent mechanism, as concluded in Fig. 9 (right side). Figure 9 A proposed diagram of hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 )-mediated anti-biofilm and biofilm eradication of l -amino acid oxidase from O. hannah venom (OH-LAAO). H 2 O 2 , a metabolite of OH-LAAO, plays a potent role in anti-biofilm against P. aeruginosa by impairment of biofilm matrix production (including alginate and PSL) and reduced c-di-GMP levels, resulting in weakened biofilm formation (left side) during the production. For the biofilm eradication (an impact on the preformed biofilms), H 2 O 2 triggers P. aeruginosa biofilm dispersion proteins that alleviate c-di-GMP levels and enhance biofilm matrix-degrading enzymes to actively destroy biofilms (right side). Full size image Nevertheless, the limitations of biofilm-degrading enzymatic treatment are a necessity of multiple enzymes due to numerous types EPS in biofilms from different organisms and different EPS compositions in each step of biofilm 16 . Interestingly, H 2 O 2 alone from OH-LAAO suppressed several EPS genes ( algD and pslB ) and enhanced numerous EPS-degrading enzymes ( endA and pslG ) without a necessity for enzyme combination suggesting the potentially effective biofilm eradication. Although spreading of the infections through the dispersed cells from biofilm 23 , the OH-LAAO antimicrobial activity might reduce this concern. Despite the necessity for further in vivo experiments, OH-LAAO might be useful for the prevention and treatment of biofilms in catheters (catheter-lock solution). In conclusion, antimicrobial and anti-biofilm activities of crude OH venoms against P. aeruginosa were possibly mainly due to LAAO that promoted H 2 O 2 -associated down-regulation of several genes for biofilm production. Moreover, H 2 O 2 generated by LAAO of OH venom had biofilm eradication activity via increased expressions of several genes for biofilm dispersion. The extraction or synthesis of OH-LAAO is a clinically fascinating candidate for anti-biofilms against Pseudomonas spp. More studies are interesting. Methods Bacterial strains and crude snake venoms The clinically isolated strains of P. aeruginosa (PACL), S. aureus (SA1, SA2, and SA3), and E. faecalis (EF1, EF2, and EF3) were isolated from the patients in the King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand. All methods and experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University (IRB 610/2564) in accordance with the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki, and the Institutional Biosafety Committee (MDCU-IBC001/2022) (the biosafety guidelines, Chulalongkorn University) with the waived informed consent (IRB 610/2564). In parallel, chlorhexidine digluconate-treated PACL (C_PACL), a representative P. aeruginosa with the enhanced biofilms from an external stimulation (an anti-septic) 49 and the commercially available bacteria, including P. aeruginosa ATCC 27853 and PAO1, E. coli ATCC 25922, and S. aureus ATCC 29213 were also used. On the other hand, crude freeze-dried venoms isolated from N. kaouthia (NK), O. hannah (OH), D. russellii (DR), and T. albolabris (TA) were obtained from the Queen Saovabha Memorial Institute, Thai Red Cross Society, Bangkok, Thailand. l -amino acid oxidase (LAAO) purification from OH venom The OH crude venom was purified by a three-step procedure of column chromatography using the ÄKTA purification machine (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Solingen, Germany) to identify the potent fraction against P. aeruginosa . Firstly, 200 mg of crude OH venom, 20 mg/mL in 10 mM phosphate buffer saline (PBS) pH 7.3, was loaded to the Sephadex G-75 column (3.2 cm × 150 cm) (GE Healthcare Life Sciences), eluted with 10 mM PBS, and measured for protein concentration by the UV absorbance ( A 280 nm ; mAU). The fractions belonging to the same A 280 nm peak were pooled, including peak-1 (fraction 5–6), peak-2 (fraction 8), peak-3 (fraction 9–10), peak-4 (fraction 11–14), and peak-5 (fraction 20–22). All peaks were determined for LAAO activity (mentioned later). Notably, peak-1 from the first step demonstrated the most positive specific LAAO activity among 5 peaks at 11.17 ± 1.31 U/mg. Secondly, the peak-1 elution from the Sephadex G-75 column chromatography was concentrated and dialyzed against 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0. The concentrated peak-1 elution (6 mL) was subsequently purified using the Resource Q column (1 mL column) (GE Healthcare Life Science), which was equilibrated with 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, and eluted with a linear gradient using 0–1 M sodium chloride (NaCl) and 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0 before measuring protein concentration ( A 280 nm ). The Resource Q column fractions that were belong to the same A 280 nm peak, including peak-1 (fraction 12–13), peak-2 (fraction 14), and peak-3 (fraction 15–17), were pooled for LAAO activity determination (mentioned later). The peak-1 eluted from the Resource Q column chromatography (the second step) showed the highest specific LAAO activity among these three peaks at 15.99 ± 1.22 U/mg. Thirdly, the peak-1 from Resource Q column chromatography was concentrated and dialyzed with 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0 for further purification (the third step purification). Briefly, 5 mL of the concentrated peak-1 was loaded to the equilibrated HiTrap™ Heparin affinity chromatography column (1.6 cm × 2.5 cm, 5 mL) (GE Healthcare Life Science) with 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), and eluted with a linear gradient using 0–1 M NaCl with 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0. Proteins in eluted fractions were measured by A 280 nm . Two peaks of A 280 nm , including peak-1 (fraction 3–7) and peak-2 (fraction 20–22), were observed and collected for LAAO activity assay (mentioned below). Between the peak-1 and peak-2 from the third step purification, the peak-1 showed the greatest specific LAAO activity (21.72 ± 1.39 U/mg) and was used for further experiments as “purified OH-LAAO”. l -amino acid oxidase (LAAO) activity test The crude OH venom and the purified fractions (mentioned above) were determined for LAAO activity using l -leucine as a substrate in the standard enzymatic assay as previously described 50 , 51 with a slight modification. Briefly, 0.5 mL of the substrate solution containing 200 mM triethanolamine solution (Sigma-Aldrich, MA, USA), 0.4 mM l -leucine (Sigma Chemical, MO, USA), and 0.0065% O -dianisidine (Sigma-Aldrich) was added with 25 µl of 0.007% horseradish peroxidase (Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 µl of the samples to start the enzymatic reaction. The substrate oxidative activity was measured by the increased absorbance at 436 nm ( A 436 nm ) every 30 s for 3 min. One unit of LAAO enzyme activity was defined as the oxidation of 1 µmole of l -leucine per min. Protein concentrations of the samples were determined by Bradford assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) with the standard protein using bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich). The LAAO enzyme activity was calculated using the following equation: $$LAAO\,enzyme\,activity \left( {\text{U/mL}} \right) = \frac{{\Delta A436\,nm \times total\,volumn\,of\,the\,assay \left( {{\text{mL}}} \right)}}{{\varepsilon \times volumn\,of\,the\,sample \left( {{\text{mL}}} \right)}}$$ (Δ A 436 nm : the increased absorbance at 436 nm ( A 436 nm ) per minute, ε: Molecular extinction coefficient of the LAAO reaction product). The specific LAAO activity was calculated using the following equation: $$Specific\,LAAO\,enzyme\,activity \left( {\text{U/mg}} \right) = \frac{{LAAO\,enzyme\,activity \left( {\text{U/mL}} \right)}}{{the\,amount\,of\,protein \left( {\text{mg/mL}} \right)}}.$$ Identification of the isolated l -amino acid oxidase from OH venom (OH-LAAO) For LAAO identification, the purified fraction from the HiTrap™ heparin column chromatography was separated by sodium dodecyl-sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) analysis. Briefly, the proteins (10 µg) were separated by 12% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis at 100 V for 90 min, followed by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB). After de-staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue de-staining solution, the gel photo was captured using a camera. Because an approximately 65 kDa protein exhibited a predominated protein band in SDS-PAGE analysis, the protein was processed in the N-terminal amino acid sequence. In brief, the eluted fraction (positive for LAAO activity) from the HiTrap™ Heparin column was treated with 2 µg of trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) at 37 °C overnight. The tryptic samples were dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge at room temperature, dissolved in 0.1% of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), loaded onto a 3.5 µm column (Agilent Zorbax 300SB-C18, Agilent Technologies, CA, USA), and eluted with a linear gradient of water/acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v/v) using the Shimadzu Prominence Nano-High Performance Liquid Chromatography with the electrospray ionization Time-of-flight mass spectrometer (nano-HPLC/ESI-TOF MS, Sciex, MA, USA). The mass spectrometry (MS) data was submitted and analyzed by Mascot sequence matching software (Matrix Science, MA, USA), using the MS data from the UniProt database protein identification. Antimicrobial activity of snake venoms Crude freeze-dried venoms dissolved in sterilized distilled water (DW) were evaluated for antimicrobial activity using the broth microdilution assay. Briefly, 25 µL of crude venoms (20 mg/mL) was added to the final volume of 200 µL of LB broth (Difco, MD, USA) in the 96-well plates, for a maximum concentration of crude venoms at 0.25 mg/mL to avoid the too less of bacterial nourishments in the broth. Then, bacterial isolates (final concentration 1 × 10 5 CFU/well) were co-cultured in LB broth supplemented with two-fold serial dilutions of crude venoms, followed by incubation at 37 °C for 18 h. The minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs), defined as the lowest concentration that inhibits bacterial growth, were visually evaluated. Next, the bacterial growth from the broth microdilution method was inoculated on LB agar (Difco) to determine the minimum bactericidal concentrations (MBCs). The MBCs were the lowest venom concentrations that kill bacteria, resulting in no visible growth on LB agar. Anti-biofilm activity testing (biofilm prevention) For biofilm prevention, bacteria (10 8 CFU/mL) were cultured in 96-well plates containing LB broth supplemented with a serial dilution of either crude venoms or purified OH-LAAO at 37 °C for 24 h. After incubation, the bacterial supernatants were removed by gently pipetting, and the biofilms were washed twice with sterilized distilled water (DW). The biofilms were stained with 0.1% crystal violet (CV) for 15 min and washed twice with DW. The minimum biofilm inhibitory concentrations (MBICs), defined as the lowest concentration that inhibits bacterial biofilm formation, were visually evaluated. The CV-stained biofilms were measured at the OD 590 nm (CV detection) to quantify the biofilm masses. Biofilm eradication activity testing (experiments on 24 h preformed biofilms) The biofilm eradication activity of either crude venoms or purified OH-LAAO was tested using 24-h preformed bacterial biofilms. As such, bacteria (10 8 CFU/mL) were grown in 96-well plates with LB broth at 37 °C for 24 h. Bacterial supernatants (containing bacterial planktonic forms) were removed by aseptically pipetting, and the 24-h biofilms were washed with sterilized DW. The biofilms were treated with LB broth containing either snake venoms or purified OH-LAAO for 24 h at 37 °C. After treatment, the remaining biofilms were stained with 0.1% crystal violet (CV) for 15 min and washed twice with DW. The minimum biofilm eradication concentrations (MBECs), defined as the lowest concentration that completely eradicates bacterial biofilm, were visually evaluated. Moreover, the remaining biofilms were quantified by CV measurement at the OD 590nm . Bacterial gene expressions The expression of genes encoding for biofilm-related proteins of P. aeruginosa was determined by quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) using primers listed in Supplementary Table S2 . Briefly, the total RNA of planktonic (bacteria without biofilms) or sessile (bacteria with biofilms) forms were extracted by TRIzol ® Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and was converted to cDNA using RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo Scientific, Vilnius, Lithuania). The numbers of gene transcripts were quantified by the QuantStudio6 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA USA) using the SYBR ® Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). The relative number of transcripts was normalized with 16S rRNA and calculated using the 2 −ΔΔct method. OH-LAAO and l -amino acids combination in bacterial inhibition study Because the substrates of LAAO were l -amino acids, the combination of OH-LAAO and l -amino acids were used against P. aeruginosa by the growth inhibition plate assay. Briefly, the lawn of P. aeruginosa (10 8 CFU/mL) on LB agar was spotted by OH-LAAO (0.025–0.1 µg/spot) with or without l -amino acids ( l -lysine or l -arginine; Sigma Chemical, MO, USA) (2.5 mM/ spot). After incubation at 37 °C for 24 h, the inhibition zone was visually observed. The increased inhibition of OH-LAAO and l -amino acids was confirmed by the time-kill assay. Briefly, P. aeruginosa (10 6 CFU/mL) was grown in LB broth supplemented with OH-LAAO (at 0.5 × MIC) with or without 250 mM of l -amino acids ( l -lysine or l -arginine) at 37 °C with shaking at 120 rpm. The viable bacterial cells at 0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 120, 240, and 360 min were quantified with the drop plate method. Accordingly, bacterial suspensions were diluted serially with sterilized 0.85% NaCl, followed by dropping on LB agar to quantify bacterial colony. Furthermore, catalase, a hydrogen peroxide decomposer, was used in the time-kill study to evaluate if hydrogen peroxide was the potent antibacterial product of OH-LAAO. In brief, P. aeruginosa (10 6 CFU/mL) was grown in LB broth supplemented with snake venoms (either crude OH venom or OH-LAAO) (at 1 × MIC) and catalase (0.1 mg/mL) (SKU, Yiwu, China). The viable bacteria were determined by the drop plate method as described above. Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was performed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences software (SPSS 22.0, SPSS Inc., IL, USA) and Graph Pad Prism version 7.0 software (La Jolla, CA, USA). All data were presented as mean ± standard error (SE). The differences between two groups and multiple groups were examined for statistical significance by a paired t -test or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s analysis, respectively. A p -value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.