Introduction Ring-tailed coatis ( Nasua nasua Carnivora: Procyonidae) are widely distributed in South America. They are known to be social animals, forming large familiar groups up to 30 individuals, composed mainly of females in reproductive age and few mature males 1 , 2 . Coatis adapt very easily in urbanized areas, where they can interact with domestic animals, such as dogs and cats 2 , 3 . In these environments they are used to explore and feed on anthropogenic food sources (e.g. garbage) 4 , 5 . The Iguaçu National Park (INP) is one of the largest remaining areas of the Atlantic Forest in Brazil, and is also an important tourist attraction, receiving annually 1.5 million visitors from many regions of the world ( https://www.icmbio.gov.br/parnaiguacu/ ). At INP coatis are known to interact constantly with tourists by locking for food, which eventually results in human injuries 6 . Such mammals can harbor several pathogens, such as rabies virus, Trypanosoma cruzi and Leishmania spp., zoonotic agents of great importance in Public Health 7 , 8 . Vector-borne agents (VBA) are pathogens (e.g. bacteria, virus, protozoa) transmitted by a plethora of vectors, such as ticks, fleas, lice, mosquitoes, sandflies 9 , 10 . Some agents transmitted by vectors can cause important economic losses and also important impacts in human health 9 , 10 . Epidemiological dynamics of VBAs are based on complex interactions among vectors, pathogens and vertebrate hosts. Regarding VBAs in coatis from Brazil, hemotropic Mycoplasma spp. has been detected in Mato Grosso do Sul and Paraná state 11 , 12 and recently, ‘ Candidatus Mycoplasma haematonasua’ has been described in coatis from “Parque Nacional do Iguaçu” (PARNA Iguaçu) 13 . Regarding Apicomplexan protozoan, Hepatozoon procyonis has been widely detected in several Brazilian regions 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , while Piroplasmids agents were detected only in coatis sampled in the Pantanal of Mato Grosso do Sul state 19 and in Minas Gerais state 17 . Interestingly, Sousa et al. 20 and Collere et al. 13 detected Anaplasmataceae agents in blood samples from coatis. While Ehrlichia 16S rRNA genotypes closely related to E. canis/E. chaffeensis, and Anaplasma 16S rRNA genotypes closely related to A. bovis and A. phagocytophilum on coatis in the Pantanal wetlands, state of Mato Grosso do Sul 20 , Collere et al. 13 failed to sequence the detected agents. Recently, Perles et al. 21 described ‘ Candidatus Ehrlichia dumleri’, a putative novel Anaplasmataceae agent, and Anaplasma sp. closely related to ‘C andidatus Anaplasma brasiliensis’ in blood samples from coatis in peri-urbanized forested areas in central-western Brazil. Considering the ecological and zoonotic importance of the knowledge on VBA, the lack of information regarding wild population’s diseases and the methodological complexity of field research with wild animals, the present study aimed to detect molecularly the presence of VBA in coati’s blood samples and assess the phylogenetic positioning of the detected agents. Moreover, the INP is one of the most important Atlantic Forest Protected area, that still harbor most of the terrestrial large mammals and it is also the second most visited National Park in Brazil 22 . To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there is no report of Bartonella spp. in coatis from Brazil, highlighting the importance of surveillance of vector-borne agents (VBA) in wild mammals. Methods Ethical aspects All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations and were approved by the local Ethics Committee on Animal Use of São Paulo State University—Unesp, Agrarian and Veterinarian Sciences School—FCAV (Protocol 07553/14) and by the Brazilian Authorization and Information System—SISBIO (Protocol 38006-2); and “Sistema Nacional de Gestão de Patrimônio Genético e do Conhecimento Tradicional Associado”—SISGEN (Protocol AAA5680); permit SISBIO (numbers: 48.141–5, 62.541–6, 38.006–2, 38.006–4, 38.006–6, and 38.006–8). All methods are reported at the present work are in accordance with ARRIVE guidelines ( https://arriveguidelines.org ). Study area and animal trapping PARNA Iguaçu is located within the Atlantic Forest Biome in the western state of Paraná, Brazil, representing one of the last remnants of this important Biome (25°05′ S to 25°40′ S and 54°30′ W to 54°40′ W) 22 (Fig. 1 ). The park contains up to 185,000 hectares of semi-deciduous forest and its fauna is highly diverse, with records of 102 species of mammals, 386 birds, 48 reptiles, 13 amphibians, 176 fishes, 839 invertebrates, and 28 species of parasite helminths, most of them endemic to the Atlantic rainforest 22 . Figure 1 Map showing Paraná State (light green) and Iguaçu National Park (dark green). Full size image Between August 2014 and December 2017, coatis ( Nasua nasua) were captured with hand nets and Tomahawk traps baited with a mixture of fresh chicken meat, fruits (banana, pineapple or mango) and peanut butter, during several campaigns, totaling 7200 h capture effort. Captures were performed at the Western region of the INP. Following the captures, the animals were physically restrained, anesthetized with tiletamine-zolazepan association (5 mg/kg, IM), and identified with a small numbered ear tag to prevent recaptures. Blood samples from 49 coatis (21 males; 28 females) were drawn from the jugular vein and then stored in EDTA-coated tubes in isothermal boxes with ice and then were transported to the laboratory for processing 23 . DNA extraction from blood samples and conventional PCR (PCR) for mammal glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gadph) endogenous gene DNA was extracted from 200 μL of blood using Biopur Kit Mini Spin Plus, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To evaluate the quality of the extracted DNA and avoid false negative results, DNA samples were tested by a conventional PCR targeting the mammal gapdh gene 24 . Ultra-pure sterile water (Life Technologies®, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was used as a negative control in PCR assays. Molecular assays for vector-borne agents Coati DNA blood samples positive for gapdh gene were submitted to PCR assays for Anaplasma, Ehrlichia, Neorickettsia, Bartonella , hemoplasmas, Hepatozoon , and Piroplasmids. All agents, target gene, primer sequences, size of the amplicon (bp), thermal cycling conditions and references are shown in Table 1 (and Figure SM1 —Supplementary file). Table 1 Molecular assays according to the involved agent, type of PCR, target gene, primer sequences, size of the amplicons (bp), thermal cycling conditions and references, used in the present study for screening and characterizing vector-borne agents DNA in coati’ blood sampled in Iguaçu National Park, Paraná state, southern Brazil. Full size table Ehrlichia canis (Jaboticabal strain—maintained in DH82 cell culture), Anaplasma phagocytophilum (Webster strain) and Neorickettsia risticii (kindly provided by Professor John Stephen Dumler (Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA) DNA were used as positive controls for Anaplasmataceae screening and characterization protocols. In the qPCR assays for Bartonella spp., serial dilutions were performed to construct standard curves with different concentrations (2.0 × 10 7 to 2.0 × 10 0 copies) of a plasmid encoding a fragment of the 83 bp nuoG gene of Bartonella henselae DNA (pIDTSMART; Integrated DNA Technologies). The number of plasmid copies was determined according to the formula (XG/μL DNA/ [Plasmid size (BP) × 660]) × 6, 22 × 10 23 × plasmid copies/μL 25 . For hemotropic mycoplasmas, Mycoplasma parvum DNA from a naturally infected domestic pig was used 26 . DNA from Hepatozoon sp. detected in a naturally infected maned-wolf ( Chrysocyon brachyurus ) was used as positive control 27 . For Piroplasms screening, Babesia vogeli DNA (Jaboticabal strain) were used as a positive control. Ultra-pure sterile water (Life Technologies®, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was used as negative control in all PCR assays. Agarose gel electrophoresis, amplicon purification and Sanger sequencing The results of cPCR, nPCR and semi-nPCR assays were visualized in 1% agarose gel stained by ethidium bromide solution and results were visualized using a UV transilluminator (ChemiDoc MP Imaging System, Bio Rad®). Positive samples were purified using ExoSAP-IT™ PCR Cleanup (ThermoFisher®) and sequenced. The sequencing was performed by Sanger method 28 using ABI PRISM 3730 DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) at Human Genome and Stem Cell Research Center, “Instituto de Biociências”, University of São Paulo (USP), Brazil. Phylogenetic analyses Eletropherograms results were analyzed using Phred-Phrap software version 23, and the quality of each nucleotide sequence was checked for a score and considered of good quality when Phred score was higher than 20 29 . Consensus sequences obtained by the alignment of the forward and reverse sequences were constructed using the same software. The BLASTn program was used to analyze consensus sequences, aiming to browse and compare with sequences from the GenBank international database 30 . All sequences obtained in the present study were deposited in NCBI platform GenBank ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/ —Nucleotide) (Supplementary Information—Table SM1 ). The obtained sequences were aligned with those retrieved from GenBank using MAFFT software, version 7 31 . For each studied agent and target gene, sequences were selected for phylogenetic inferences based on BLAST results and other studies performed in Brazil and other countries. For phylogenetic analyses, initially, the best model of evolution was selected by the program IQTREE (available at: http://iqtree.cibiv.univie.ac.at/ ), under the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) 32 . Maximum likelihood (ML) analysis was performed with iqtree (available at: http://iqtree.cibiv.univie.ac.at/ ) and Bayesian analyses were performed using CIPRES gateway 33 . The phylogenetic tree edition and rooting (outgroup) were performed using the Treegraph 2.0 beta software 34 . Results DNA extraction and quality evaluation Among the 49 ring-tailed coatis’ DNA blood samples, all were positive in the cPCR based on the gapdh gene and were included in subsequent analysis. PCR assays for Anaplasma spp Seven (7/49—14.3%) coatis were positive in the nPCR for Anaplasma spp. based on the 16S rRNA gene. Six sequences (439-519 bp) were obtained and showed 99–100% identity (ID), 89–97% query-coverage (QC) and 0.0 E-value (EV) with Anaplasma sp. sequences previously detected in wild Nasua nasua from Mato Grosso do Sul State 20 , 21 (GenBank accession numbers KY499184, KY499186-87, KY499192-95); and 100% ID, 88% QC and 0.0 EV with Anaplasma sp. detected in a rodent 35 . Four samples amplified for ITS—23S–5S (339–415 bp) and the obtained sequences showed 94.7% ID, 100% QC and 2e-114 EV with ‘ Candidatus Anaplasma brasiliensis’ (MT267343-44) previously detected in anteaters from São Paulo state, southeastern Brazil 36 . Three samples amplified for gltA gene (569–599 bp) and the obtained sequences showed 83% ID, 90% QC, and 1e-14 EV with Anaplasma sp. detected in Bos taurus in Japan (JX445933). Maximum likelihood (ML) analyses based on the 16S rRNA gene (519 bp) and TIM2 + I + G4 evolutionary model clustered the sequences detected in the present study in a large clade with other Anaplasma sp. sequences previously detected in wild animals from Brazil (Fig. 2 ). ML analyses based on the gltA gene (alignment of 655 bp and TPM3 + G4 as evolutionary model) (Fig. 3 A) clustered the sequences detected in the present in a new clade, with the same origin of Anaplasma platys . ML analyses based on the ITS region (23S–5S) (alignment of 420 bp and K3P + G4 as evolutionary model) (Fig. 3 B) clustered the obtained sequences in a new clade with the same origin of ‘ Candidatus Anaplasma brasiliensis’. Figure 2 Phylogenetic trees inferred by the Bayesian method and based on 16S rRNA gene from Anaplasma spp. sequences obtained from blood from ring-tailed coatis ( Nasua nasua ) from PARNA. Sequences of Anaplasma sp. detected in the present study are highlighted in bold/underlined. Neorickettsia risticii was used as outgroup. Full size image Figure 3 Phylogenetic trees inferred by the Bayesian method and based on Anaplasma spp. sequences obtained from blood from ring-tailed coatis ( Nasua nasua ) from PARNA. Sequences of Anaplasma sp. detected in the present study are highlighted in bold/underlined. ( A ) gltA gene; N. risticii, Wolbachia pipientis and Rickettsia prowazekii were used as outgroup; ( B ) ITS—23S–5S; Ehrlichia muris and Ehrlichia chaffeensis were used as outgroup. Full size image PCR assay for Hepatozoon spp Three (3/49—6%) coatis were positive in the nPCR for Hepatozoon spp. based on the 18S rRNA gene. The three obtained sequences (945, 985 and 1031 bp) showed 100% ID, 100% QC, and 0.0 EV with Hepatozoon procyonis detected in coatis from Brazil (GenBank accession numbers MF685386-MF685410 and MW862003-MW862006). Phylogenetic analyses (ML method and GTR as evolutionary model) based on an alignment of 1017 bp of the 18S rRNA gene clustered all three sequences detected in the present study in a high supported clade (100% of bootstrap) with Hepatozoon procyonis sequences previously detected in ring-tailed coatis from other Brazilian states (Figure SM2 —Supplementary file). PCR assay for hemotropic Mycoplasma spp Forty-two (42/49—85.7%) ring-tailed coatis samples were positive in the snPCR for hemotropic Mycoplasma spp. based on the 16S rRNA gene. Eight samples were randomly selected for sequencing (892–941 bp). All samples presented 99.8–100% ID, 100% QC, and 0.0 EV with ‘ Candidatus Mycoplasma haematonasua’ and hemotropic Mycoplasma sp. previously detected in coatis from Mato Grosso do Sul state and Paraná state, Brazil. ML analyses (alignment of 941 bp and TN + I + G4) clustered the sequences detected in the present study in a large clade with other sequences previously detected in coatis from Brazil, with 100% of clade support (Figure SM3 —Supplementary file). PCR assays for Bartonella spp Twelve samples (12/49—24.5%) showed positivity in qPCR assays for Bartonella spp. based on the nuoG gene. The number of copies of Bartonella - nuoG fragment/μL ranged from 1.38 × 10 1 to 5.10 × 10 1 . The mean values of efficiency, correlation coefficient, and y-intercept of qPCR reactions mean were 103.4%, 0.920, and 36.031, respectively. Five out of 12 qPCR-positive samples for Bartonella also showed positivity in a PCR assay based on the pap-31 gene. The obtained sequences ranged from 382 to 532 bp and showed 99.06–100% ID, 100% QC, 0.0 E-value and with Bartonella machadoae 37 . Seven out of 12 qPCR-positive samples for Bartonella also showed positivity in a PCR assay based on the gltA gene, with sequences ranging from 401 to 582 bp and showing 99.83–100% ID, 100% QC and 0.0 EC with Bartonella machadoae . Four out of 12 qPCR-positive samples for Bartonella also showed positivity in a PCR assay based on the ftsZ gene, with sequences ranging from 505 to 549 bp and showing 100% ID, 100% QC, and 0.0 EV and with Bartonella machadoae . Bayesian phylogenetic analyses based on both the gltA gene (alignment of 578 bp and TIM2 + G as evolutionary model) and the ftsZ gene (alignment of 538 bp and HKY + I + G4 as evolutionary model) clustered all sequences detected in the present study in a clade with Bartonella machadoae (Fig. 4 ). Figure 4 Phylogenetic trees based on the Maximum likelihood method from Bartonella spp. sequences obtained from blood from ring-tailed coatis ( Nasua nasua ) from PARNA. Sequences of Bartonella sp. detected in the present study are highlighted in bold/underlined ( A ) gltA gene; Brucella abortus and Ochrobactrum anthropi were used as outgroup; ( B ) ftsZ gene; Brucella abortus and Ochrobactrum anthropi were used as outgroup. Full size image PCR assays for Ehrlichia spp. , Neorickettsia risticii and Piroplasmids None of the 49 ring-tailed coatis’ DNA blood samples were positive in the molecular assays for Ehrlichia spp., Neorickettsia risticii and piroplasmids. Co-infection by vector-borne agents Only four animals were negative for all the vector-borne agents tested. None of the examined ring-tailed coatis were positive for all tested agents. The most co-infection observed was from bacterial agents, in first place with hemotropic Mycoplasma sp. and Bartonella sp. (9 animals) and in second place Anaplasma sp. with hemotropic Mycoplasma sp. (6 animals). Only two animals presented co-infections by three agents ( Bartonella sp., Anaplasma sp. and hemotropic Mycoplasma sp.) All information about positive animals for the investigated agents regarding sampling date, sex and co-infections are shown in Table SM2 —Supplementary file). All co-infections among the investigated agents are presented in a Venn Diagram (Figure SM4 —Supplementary file). Discussion Herein, wild ring-tailed coatis were found to be infected with a potential novel genotype of Anaplasma sp., related to genotypes previously detected in ectoparasites (e.g. Amblyomma sculptum, Amblyomma ovale ) and wild animals (e.g. Sphiggurus villosus , Leopardus pardalis ) 20 , and phylogenetically related to ‘ Candidatus Anaplasma brasiliensis’ 36 . Anaplasma spp. belong to Anaplasmataceae family and Order Rickettsiales and are obligate intracellular α-proteobacteria that can cause important diseases in humans and animals 38 , 39 . Representatives of Anaplasmataceae agents have been detected in several mammal species, and wild and domestic carnivores are considered an important source of these agents, especially in anthropized areas, where a close contact among domestic/wild animals and humans can occur 39 , 40 . In the USA, raccoons ( Procyon lotor ) play a role as reservoirs for Anaplasma phagocytophilum , a zoonotic agent 39 , 41 , 42 . When it comes to coatis, Sousa et al. 21 detected an Ehrlichia 16S rDNA genotype phylogenetically related to multiple Ehrlichia spp. previously detected in ticks and wild rodents from Brazil. Additionally, two different Anaplasma 16S rRNA genotypes were detected in ring-tailed coatis from the Brazilian Pantanal: while one was positioned in a clade related to A. phagocytophilum, the other one clustered with A . bovis . Also, Ehrlichia/Anaplasma 16S rDNA was detected in ring-tailed coatis from the same area (PARNA) where the present study was conducted, but the authors were not able to sequence the positive sample 13 . In the present study, phylogenetic inferences based on the gltA gene positioned the Anaplasma sp. Detected in coatis into a new clade, with the same origin of Anaplasma platys . In the ITS (23S–5S)-based phylogeny, the Anaplasma genotypes detected showed to be closely related to ‘Candidatus Anaplasma brasiliensis’. These findings suggest that a novel Anaplasma species, yet to be isolated and characterize, occurs in ring-tailed coatis from Brazil. In the present study, a lower occurrence for H. procyonis was found when compared to those previously reported in ring-tailed coatis from other Brazilian regions. The genus Hepatozoon comprise apicomplexan hemogregarinids with a heteroxene life cycle, that infects a wide range of vertebrates, including mammals, reptiles, birds and amphibians 43 . Up to now, the only Hepatozoon species known to infect Procyonidae mammals is H. procyonis , that was first described in 1961 infecting monocytes of raccoons ( P. lotor ) in the USA 44 . In Brazil, occurrence rates of 42% (13/42), 25% (21/93), 32% (69/262), and 68% (112/165) were reported in ring-tailed coatis from the Pantanal wetlands of Mato Grosso do Sul state, São Paulo state, Minas Gerais state, and peri-urban forested areas (Cerrado biome) in Mato Grosso do Sul states, respectively 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 . In the present study, only 3/49 (6%) samples tested positive for Hepatozoon sp. This lower prevalence might not be related to the applied molecular technique, since a nested-PCR based on the 18S rRNA was used, which showed to be very sensitive in the detection of H. procyonis with fluctuating parasitemia 18 . Considering that the vector for H. procyonis is not known yet, the lower prevalence found herein might be due to the tick fauna presented (and consequently vector competence) in the studied area when compared to the other studies. Amblyomma spp. larvae, and adults of Haemaphysalis juxtakochi, Amblyomma brasiliense , Amblyomma coelebs and Amblyomma ovale have been reported in coatis from PARNA 45 . When compared to other studies conducted in Mato Grosso do Sul 14 , 15 , São Paulo 46 , 47 , and Minas Gerais 17 states, where high occurrence of H. procyonis has been reported in the sampled ring-tailed coatis, A. sculptum ticks were not found parasitizing the animals sampled herein 45 . The role of A. sculptum and other tick species in the transmission of H. procyonis should be further evaluated in the future. The most prevalent VBA detected in ring-tailed coatis from PARNA Iguaçu was Mycoplasma sp. closely related to ‘Candidatus Mycoplasma haematonasua’, which was found in 85.7% of the studied animals. Hemoplasmas (hemotropic mycoplasmas) are obligate epi-erythrocytic bacteria that infect a wide variety of mammalian hosts. Infections with this agent can induce anemia and acute hemolysis and clinical signs, such as anorexia, lethargy, dehydration, weight loss and, in some cases, sudden death in domestic animals 48 , while the infection appears to be subclinical in wildlife 49 . In animals of the Procyonidae family, hemotropic Mycoplasma sp. 16S rRNA genotypes phylogenetically related to “ Candidatus Mycoplasma erythrodidelphis”, “ Candidatus Mycoplasma haemozalophi”, Candidatus Mycoplasma haemominutum” and “ Candidatus Mycoplasma haemolamae” were detected in 59/95 (62.1%) raccoons in the USA 50 . In Brazil, Sousa et al. 12 found 24/31 (77.4%) wild ring-tailed coatis in the Brazilian Pantanal positive for hemotropic Mycoplasma sp. in a PCR based on the 16S rRNA gene. Interestingly, authors detected two different genotypes: one closely related to hemotropic Mycoplasma sp. detected in raccoons from the USA, and another one closely related to Mycoplasma haemofelis . More recently, Collere et al. 13 detected hemotropic Mycoplasma sp. in 44.5% (8/18) coatis in the same area (PARNA) where the present study was conducted. Based on two molecular markers, namely 16S rRNA and 23S rRNA, a putative novel hemoplasma, ‘ Candidatus Mycoplasma haematonasua’, was proposed. It seems that hemoplasmas are the most prevalent VBA detected in Procyonidae animals from the Americas. Although some hemotropic Mycoplasma species (e.g. Mycoplasma suis, Mycoplasma haemocanis, Mycoplasma haemofelis ) 51 can cause moderate to severe disease in their hosts, the pathogenicity of ‘ Candidatus M. haematonasua’ is not yet known, requiring more studies, especially in animals infected with more than one VBA. The main route of transmission of hemoplasmas seems to be through blood-sucking arthropods (e.g. fleas, ticks, etc.) 48 , 52 . However, few experimental studies have been carried out in this sense, since such agents have not been yet cultivated in vitro 48 . Other routes of transmission have also been pointed out, such as vertical, blood transfusion) 53 , 54 and through aggressive interactions among cats 55 and wild rodents ( Gerbillus andersoni ) 56 . Based on multilayer network analysis, Alcantara et al. 57 recently demonstrated the lack of association among ectoparasites, non-hematophagous bats and hemoplasmas, suggesting that ectoparasites may not play an important role in the transmission of hemotropic mycoplasmas among bats. Considering these putative alternative transmission routes, Sousa et al. 12 hypothesized that the gregarious behavior of coatis associated to the fact that these mammals tend to form large groups 1 might contributed for a higher incidence of hemotropic Mycoplasma spp. among this Procyonidae species. The present study shows, for the first time, the molecular detection of Bartonella sp. in blood samples from ring-tailed coatis from Brazil. The genus Bartonella (Rhizobiales: Bartonellaceae) comprises Gram-negative, facultative intracellular alpha-proteobacteria, which have been identified in a wide variety of mammals, including humans 58 , 59 , 60 . The transmission of bartonellae has been mainly associated with hematophagous arthropod vectors 61 . Up to now, Bartonella spp. has only been molecularly detected in raccoons from the USA. Hwang and Gottdenker 62 , when studying free-living raccoons from Georgia, USA, detected 16 positive samples (43%—16/37) in a nested-PCR based on the 16S–23SrRNA intergenic spacer region (ITS). Thirteen positive samples were sequenced and 12 samples were identified as B. henselae and one identified as B. koehlerae 62 . Bai et al. 63 , when analyzing 186 spleen samples from raccoons during the enhanced rabies surveillance in Colorado, USA, obtained 14 samples positive in a PCR for Bartonella spp. based on the ITS (16S-23S) region. Sequencing results revealed that 11 raccoons were infected with B. rochalimae and three with Bartonella vinsonii subsp. berkhoffii 63 , recently reclassified as Bartonella berkhoffii by Whole Genome Sequencing Analysis 64 . When analyzing coatis from the Pantanal wetlands in Mato Grosso do Sul state, Brazil, Sousa et al. 65 failed to detect DNA from Bartonella sp. In blood samples from 31 sampled coatis. In the present study, 24.5% (12/49) showed to be positive in a qPCR based on the nuoG gene. By sequencing three molecular markers ( gltA, pap-31 , and ftsZ), B. machadoae was identified in ring-tailed coatis from PARNA. Bartonella machadoae has been recently isolated and described from wild rodents from the Pantanal wetlands, Mato Grosso do Sul state, central-western Brazil, and showed to be strictly related to species belonging to B. vinsonii complex 37 . The zoonotic potential is yet unknown, and further studies should be carried out, since Bartonella species belonging to B. vinsonii complex are associated with clinical manifestations in humans in different regions of the world 37 . Fleas have been suggested as putative vector for Bartonellla among rodents in Brazil 65 , 66 . Indeed, Bartonella sp. has been molecularly detected in Polygenis bohlsi bolshi fleas collected from rodents in the Pantanal wetlands biome, Mato Grosso do Sul state, central-western Brazil 65 , as well as in Polygenis occidentalis, Polygenis platensis , and Craneopsylla minerva from Pampa grasslands and Atlantic rainforest biomes, in the State of Rio Grande do Sul, southern Brazil 66 . Recently, B. machadoae has been molecularly detected in Amblyomma sculptum nymphs collected from wild boars ( Sus scrofa ), which showed to be negative for Bartonella spp. in a qPCR based on the nuoG gene, in southeastern Brazil. According to the authors, A. sculptum nymphs may have acquired the Bartonella infection when fed as larvae in a mammal (most probably rodents), and transestadially perpetuate the infection through the nymph stage. It this is true, A. sculptum may play a role in the transmission of B. machadoae 67 . The present study expands the host specificity range of B. machadoae , which has been isolated only from rodents until the present moment 37 . A small percentage (8.1%) of animals were negative for the screened VBA in the present study. The most prevalent co-infection observed was from bacterial VBA agents, in first place (18.3%) with hemotropic Mycoplasma sp. and Bartonella sp., and Anaplasma sp. and hemotropic Mycoplasma sp. in second place (12.2%) Only two animals (4%) presented co-infections by three VBA ( Bartonella sp., Anaplasma sp. and hemotropic Mycoplasma sp.). Although VBA infections seem to be associated with subclinical diseases in wild animals 18 , 49 , VBA may play a role as potential opportunistic pathogens in immunocompromised animals, in stressful situations or in coinfections. For instance, Moraes et al. 23 demonstrated that the infection by filarial nematodes in ring-tailed coatis had no effects on the body condition and serum biochemistry parameters of the evaluated coatis, albeit eosinophilia was observed. Also, Perles et al. 18 showed that the H. procyonis infection seems not to significantly influence clinical and hematological parameters. Co-infections may play an important role in these infections. For instance, Alic et al. 68 described a fatal case caused by coinfection by Leptospira spp. and H. canis in a red fox cub ( Vulpes vulpes ) in Saravejo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. Also, Silveira et al. 69 reported a fatal case of co-infection by Rangelia vitalii, Hepatozoon sp., Leishmania sp., and Entamoeba and helminths ( Ancylostoma caninum, Ancylostoma braziliensis , Molineus sp., Trichuris sp. and Spirometra sp.) in the threatened maned-wolf ( Chrysocyon brachyurus ) from Brazil. Our results highlight the importance of assessing the health of wild animals in one of the largest remaining areas of Atlantic forest in Brazil. Our observations also reveal the needs to deepen and expanding this type of studies for other mammals and possible vectors inventories. The coati, besides common, play an important role in food chain, being also the symbol of the company that provides tourism care and probably the only wild mammal observed during the INP tourist visit. Since the zoonotic potential and transmission routes of the detected VBA are not yet known, VBA surveillance in this area is much needed. Future studies are necessary to understand the pathogenicity of the detected agents to coatis as well as their zoonotic potential. Also, new studies combining other methodologies with molecular detection, such as isolation, blood smears to investigate the target host cells, and health analyses (e.g. hematological and biochemical analyses) would provide a better approach on the surveillance and understanding of the pathogenicity of such agents. Conclusions Ring-tailed coatis from Iguaçu National Park were found infected with different vector-borne agents. The most prevalent VBA was Mycoplasma sp. closely related to ‘ Candidatus Mycoplasma haematonasua’, followed by Bartonella sp . , Anaplasma sp., and Hepatozoon procyonis . A putative novel Anaplasma species, yet to be isolated and characterized, occurs in ring-tailed coatis from Iguaçu National Park. This is the first molecular detection of B. machadoae in coatis. Co-infections by Mycoplasma sp., Bartonella sp. and Anaplasma sp. are reported for the first time in coatis.