Introduction Kawasaki disease (KD) is a febrile disease that affects children under 5 years of age 1 . The core pathological feature is systemic vasculitis, which is common in medium and small-sized vessels. The severe complication is coronary artery lesion (CAL), including coronary aneurysm, coronary stenosis, coronary thrombosis and sudden cardiac death, etc 2 . In recent years, with the increased incidence of KD, especially incomplete KD and KD unresponsive to IVIG therapy, KD has evolved as a major cause of acquired heart disease in children and adolescentsn 3 . The etiology and pathogenesis of KD are not fully understood, but may be related to a combination of genetics, post-infection stress, and immune response 4 . It has been suggested that invasion by specific pathogens and disturbances in immune regulation may result in KD 5 . Therefore, it has been speculated that inflammatory parameters associated with exogenous post-infection stress have the potential to predict KD and its prognosis 6 . Recent research have shown that blood cell parameters neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) and platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio (PLR) are associated with IVIG resistance in KD 7 . Eosinophils in the blood are an important component of the immune system and have a role in regulating over-activation of immune function and promoting inflammatory responses 8 . Chemokines and cytokines all stimulate the accumulation of eosinophils, while eosinophil activation can also secrete cytokines to further promote the inflammatory cascade response 9 . Study shows eosinophils can effectively differentiate KD from other febrile diseases 10 . Meanwhile, eosinophils were also found to be associated with IVIG resistance in KD 11 . The eosinophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (ELR) is a well-recognized indicator of inflammation 12 . Studies have shown that ELR is significantly elevated in patients with allergic rhinitis, suggesting an association with allergic reactions and inflammation 13 . ELR has also been found to have better diagnostic accuracy than eosinophils or lymphocytes alone in predicting coronary slow flow phenomena 14 . From the above, it is clear that ELR is closely associated with neocoronary pneumonia, allergic rhinitis, and abnormal coronary blood flow. Recent manuscripts have also confirmed that eosinophils can be used to differentiate Kawasaki disease from other febrile diseases, but with low diagnostic performance. As mentioned earlier, ELR is more accurate than eosinophils in the diagnosis of coronary slow flow abnormalities, however, the value of ELR in differentiating KD from other febrile diseases has not been reported yet. The diagnosis of KD depends on clinical phenotype, and there is no controversy in confirming the diagnosis of complete KD, but the confirmation of incomplete KD or suspected cases is often more difficult, which can easily lead to misdiagnosis and missed diagnosis. Timely application of IVIG treatment in the acute phase of KD can reduce the incidence of CAL 15 . Therefore, the purpose of this study was to investigate the diagnostic value of ELR for KD in an attempt to provide a basis for decision making for early intervention in KD and prevention of serious complications of KD. Results Clinical features and univariate analysis To demonstrate the clinical and laboratory characteristics of the two populations, descriptive statistical analyses and one-way analysis of variance were performed on the parameters of the two populations. The results of the normal distribution test suggested that age, WBC, HGB, PCT, CRP, NLR, PLR, ELR and PNI did not conform to a normal distribution. A total of 1794 children were enrolled in this study, of whom 1089 (61%) were male and 705 (39%) were female. 121 (64%) boys and 69 (36%) girls were in the KD group, with a median age of 1.00 (1.00–2.00) years-old in the KD group. There were 968 (60%) boys and 636 (40%) girls in the febrile control group with a median age of 1.00 (1.00–2.00) years-old. We next performed univariate analysis of all variables and found that comparing gender and age in two groups suggested no statistical significance (p > 0.05), while comparing WBC, HGB, PCT, CRP, NLR, PLR, ELR and PNI in two groups suggested statistical significance (Table 1 ). Table 1 Phenotype of study subjects between the KD and the febrile controls. Full size table Multivariate logistic regression analysis The indicators with statistical differences in the univariate analysis, such as WBC, HGB, PCT, CRP, NLR, PLR, ELR and PNI, were included in the logistics regression equation analysis to find the independent risk factors for KD, and the nomogram were drawn according to the statistically significant results in logistics regression analysis. Thus, the results of the logistics regression analysis showed that WBC, HGB, CRP, NLR, ELR and PNI were the independent risk factors for KD compared to other febrile diseases (Table 2 ). Table 2 Multivariate logistic regression analysis between the KD and the febrile controls. Full size table Evaluation model for predicting KD We plotted the nomogram using the rms package in the R software. The results of the multivariate logistic regression were used to plot the nomogram (Fig. 1 ). The corresponding line chart of the web page can be viewed at https://guoxinlinar.shinyapps.io/KDvsfever/ . The risk of occurrence of KD corresponding to the total score in the nomogram is shown in Table 3 . As shown in Fig. 1 , the "Points" at the top are the points corresponding to each index below, for example, if the "ELR" of a febrile child is 0.5, the "ELR" in the For example, if the ELR of a febrile child is 0.5, the corresponding score of "ELR" in the model is about 45. The "Total Points" in the graph are the total points obtained by summing the scores of all indicators, and the total points correspond to the probability of KD in the "Probability of KD" in the graph. The web version we have developed is the same as this chart, but it is easier to use. Figure 1 Nomogram plot of KD diagnostic prediction model. WBC (× 10 9 /L); HGB (g/L); CRP(mg/L). Full size image Table 3 The total score in the column line graph corresponds to the risk of KD. Full size table Performance of the nomogram We plotted the ROC curves of the prediction model using the ROCR package in the R software. The ROC curve to examine the diagnostic performance of the column line graph showed an area under the curve of 0.921(95% CL: 0.900–0.942), suggesting good diagnostic performance (Fig. 2 ). The C-index of the column line plot was also 0.921 (95% CL: 0.900–0.942) and was confirmed by bootstrapping validation to be 0.918, which indicates that the model has good discriminatory power. A calibration curve was used to internally validate the diagnostic performance of the column line graph 16 . The results of the calibration curve showed that the predicted probability of the column line diagram for KD basically matched well with the actual probability, which suggested a good correspondence between the predicted and actual results (Fig. 3 ). Figure 2 ROC curve plot corresponds to the nomogram. Full size image Figure 3 The calibration curves of the nomogram. Full size image ROC curve analysis of KD diagnosed by ELR alone To test the diagnostic value of ELR alone in discriminating KD from other febrile diseases, we performed a separate ROC curve analysis of ELR levels in both groups. The area under the ROC curve for ELR was 0.809 (Fig. 4 ). the cutoff value for ELR was 0.04 (Table 4 ). Figure 4 ROC curve for KD diagnosed by ELR. AUC = 0.809. Full size image Table 4 The cutoff of the ELR. Full size table Discussion In this report, we reviewed clinical information from 190 patients with KD and 1604 children with other febrile illnesses, analyzed the ability of ELR to discriminate between children with KD and other febrile illnesses, and focused on the construction of a new highly accurate prediction model. We successfully constructed a clinical diagnostic model based on logistic regression with six factors including WBC, HGB, PCT, CRP, NLR, PLR, ELR and PNI. The results of ROC curve, calibration curve and bootstrapping validation showed that the model has good accuracy and stability. Mr. Tomisaku Kawasaki, a Japanese pediatrician, came into contact with his first child with Kawasaki disease in 1961 and first reported his collection of 50 Kawasaki disease patients in English in 1974 17 . His research revealed that a subset of children with unexplained fever would develop similar symptoms of skin, mucous membrane and lymph node changes, and would also cause serious cardiovascular complications such as coronary artery thrombosis. Kawasaki disease has become one of the leading causes of acquired heart disease in children as more and more cases are reported 3 . The early diagnosis of KD is still highly dependent on the specific clinical signs and symptoms of KD as in the past, and the signs and symptoms of KD in clinical practice are sometimes less typical or incompletely present at the early stage of the disease, which sets a barrier to the confirmation of KD diagnosis. During the three years of the COVID-19 epidemic, the diagnosis of KD has been given a new challenge because of the increasing reports of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C), a complication of COVID-19 infection in children with signs and symptoms highly similar to those of KD 18 . Unlike other COVID-19 patients, children with MIS-C have their own unique clinical phenotype and organ damage pattern 19 . Cardiovascular complications and inflammatory cytokine storms are common features of MIS-C and KD 20 . The high incidence of cardiac complications, elevated inflammatory markers, elevated markers of myocardial damage, and thrombocytopenia and lymphopenia have been noted in studies as diagnostic tools to differentiate MIS-C from KD 21 . The time frame for our selected study population was January 2018 to June 2022 in Shenzhen, with the COVID-19 epidemic continuing from the initial December 2019 until today. A Japanese cohort study showed a significant reduction in the incidence of children with KD during the COVID-19 epidemic compared to the pre-COVID-19 epidemic 22 . The epidemiological trend of COVID-19 in Shenzhen was characterized by a rapid initial growth of the epidemic, followed by a short period of peak incidence, and then a rapid reduction in incidence, all due to the rapid development of non-pharmaceutical interventions and measures by the Shenzhen government to effectively control community and intra-family transmission 23 . Control measures in South China during the COVID-19 epidemic resulted in a significant reduction in respiratory pathogen infections, which may be related to the reduced incidence of KD in Shenzhen 24 . Of course active COVID-19 vaccination also has an indirect effect on the reduction of respiratory infections and the reduction of Kawasaki disease. Few cases of MIS-C have been reported in Shenzhen, and incomplete KD and atypical KD are still the main sources of misdiagnosis and underdiagnosis in the diagnosis of KD. Confirmation of the diagnosis of KD remains a considerable challenge for pediatricians, as the clinical presentation of KD is sometimes incomplete and delayed, coupled with the interference of COVID-19 infection and Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome, making it difficult to distinguish KD from other febrile illnesses in children based on clinical presentation alone, and there are currently no specific laboratory tests for KD to assist in confirming the diagnosis. A recent study reported on the epidemiology and independent risk factors for delayed diagnosis of KD, which found that delayed diagnosis occurs in one in ten KD cases initially, but has gradually decreased to 4.6% over time. Children older than 1 year, with atypical clinical presentation and incomplete KD were associated with late diagnosis, while delayed diagnosis was strongly associated with the occurrence of CAL 25 . Pediatricians need accurate diagnosis of KD and timely treatment of KD in order to reduce the incidence of CAL. Therefore, clinical prediction models are an important tool to assist pediatricians in more accurately identifying KD from other febrile illnesses. WBC expression has been shown to be significantly increased in the acute phase of KD and should be considered as one of the alternative predictors 26 . Although WBC alone is not very specific for the diagnosis of KD, it can improve the identification of KD when combined with other indicators 27 . WBC can also be used to predict the risk of CAL and the odds of non-response to IVIG therapy in KD patients 28 . Therefore, although the diagnostic ability of WBC for KD is limited, it is still widely used in actual clinical work, and its diagnosis of KD still has some clinical significance. Transient anemia has been shown to occur in children with the acute phase of KD, which may be associated with iron deficiency induced by the inflammatory factor iron-regulator 29 . HGB can be combined with other indicators to differentiate KD from other febrile children 30 . A decrease in HGB after IVIG treatment is associated with IVIG resistance 31 . The ability of HGB alone to diagnose KD remains limited, but HGB is still a predictor worth considering. CRP is the classic clinical indicator of inflammation and is significantly elevated during the acute phase of KD 32 . CRP can likewise be combined with other indicators to distinguish KD from other febrile children to compensate for its own lack of diagnostic specificity 33 . CRP can be combined with other inflammatory indicators to predict the risk of IVIG resistance in children with KD 34 . As an extension of its predictive value, the ratio of CRP to albumin can be used to predict coronary artery disease and IVIG resistance in children with KD 35 . These demonstrate the role of CRP in predicting KD and its complications. High NLR expression is strongly associated with the severity of KD 36 . NLR together with other indicators are relatively effective in distinguishing KD from other febrile children 37 . NLR combined with other factors can predict KD coronary lesions 38 . NLR was also an important predictor of IVIG resistance in children with KD 7 . PNI is used to assess the immune and nutritional status of patients and has been reported as a predictive marker of surgical prognosis in various types of cancer 39 . Studies have demonstrated that PNI can be used to predict KD from febrile patients 27 . Additional studies have identified PNI as a novel independent predictor of IVIG-resistant KD 7 . PNI also has diagnostic value for KD shock syndrome and cardiovascular complications 40 . Studies have shown increased expression of eosinophils in children with KD, suggesting that eosinophils are associated with the development of Kawasaki disease 41 . Eosinophils can be used as one of the indicators to differentiate between children with KD and hyperthermia 42 . In addition, studies have found a strong correlation between eosinophils and coronary lesions in KD 43 . ELR as an indicator of inflammation has not been discussed for its clinical significance in KD. In our study, we found for the first time that ELR expression was significantly increased in KD compared to other febrile children. When the ELR is greater than 0.04, there is reason to highly suspect the possibility of KD. The diagnostic accuracy of KD can then be increased by combining it with other inflammatory indicators. This is a single-center retrospective study with a relatively small number of cases, and the prediction model needs to be further validated in a multicenter and larger sample cohort study. Our study showed that inflammatory markers such as WBC, HGB, CRP, NLR, ELR, and PNI have good predictive ability for KD. This report is the first to cite ELR as a predictor to discriminate KD from other febrile diseases. This paper clarifies the importance of ELR for KD and provides a direction for further exploration on the pathogenesis of KD. Methods Study design and ethics statement The trial design was developed in accordance with the STROBE statement of observational study guidelines 44 . The type of research was categorized as a case-control study. This study was conducted according to the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the ethics committee of Shenzhen Longgang District Maternity & Child Healthcare Hospital (protocol code IRB No. LGFYYXLLL-2022-025 in 2022.09.29). The Medical Ethics Committee of Longgang District Maternity & Child Healthcare Hospital of Shenzhen City has approved this retrospective study to waive the subject's informed consent. Study setting and study participants Children with KD hospitalized at Shenzhen Longgang District Maternity & Child Healthcare Hospital from January 2018 to June 2022 were included in this study. Children with fever of other etiologies during the same period were used as controls 27 . 36 KD patients and 9140 febrile control patients were excluded because of autoimmune disease, genetic metabolic disease, unexplained fever, or incomplete data. Finally 190 KD patients and 1604 febrile control patients were included in the study. Data sources and variables The research data came from information collected from clinical medical record systems by two researchers within the team. There were no differences in gender and age between the two groups of children, suggesting comparability between the groups (Table 1 ). Clinical and laboratory indices were collected and compared between the two groups of children. The diagnosis of KD and incomplete KD was based on the KD diagnostic criteria established by the American Heart Association (AHA) in 2017 15 . The age and gender were obtained from the first page of the medical case system and were filled in by the child and his relatives. The routine blood and biochemical results are the actual data uploaded by the hospital's laboratory department, and the test samples were taken on the day the child was admitted to the hospital and before the IVIG was used. Information on gender, age, weight, clinical presentation, and laboratory results were collected from enrolled children, including laboratory results such as white blood cells (WBC), hemoglobin (HGB), calcitoninogen (PCT), hypersensitive C-reactive protein (CRP), NLR, PLR, ELR, Onodera's prognostic nutritional index (PNI). PNI is composed of a serum albumin value (ALB) and a lymphocyte count with the formula PNI = ALB (g/L) + 5 × lymphocyte count (10 9 /L). The formula for calculating ELR is: ELR = Eosinophil count (10 9 /L)/lymphocyte count (10 9 /L). Bias controls and study size Patients with fever in KD and non-KD were included in the study strictly according to the diagnostic criteria. The study was retrospective, and two subject members masked patient name and hospitalization number information while deriving information from the medical record system to reduce selection bias in the study. Both data collectors were experienced pediatricians who were familiar with the inclusion and exclusion criteria and workflow of the study, laboratory data were measured uniformly by a laboratory physician according to the criteria, and the laboratory physician did not know in advance that the subject being tested would be included as a study subject, which reduced information bias. Routine blood, blood biochemistry and KD are influenced by age and gender, so the included control patients in this study will match the age distribution and gender distribution of Kawasaki disease patients to reduce confounding bias caused by confounding factors. We estimated the sample size required for the study using PASS software and found that 8 KD patient and 8 control patient were expected to be required. The sample size was calculated by setting a category one error α = 0.05 and a category two error β = 0.2. The results of the calculations indicated that the actual sample size included in the study far exceeded the estimated sample size. Statistical analysis We used R-4.2.1 software and the rms and ROCR statistical package for statistical analysis and visualization. Firstly, To demonstrate the clinical and laboratory characteristics of the two populations, descriptive statistical analyses and one-way analysis of variance were performed on the parameters of the two populations. That is, we will test for normal distribution for the measures involved in the two groups. The measurement data conforming to the normal distribution are statistically described by means and standard deviations and analyzed for differences by independent samples t-test; the non-normally distributed measurement data are statistically described by median and interquartile range (IQR) and analyzed for differences by Mann–Whitney U rank sum test. Count data were statistically described by frequencies and percentages, and differences were analyzed by chi-square test. p-values < 0.05 suggested that the differences were statistically significant. Next, parameters with statistically significant analysis of variance were screened for inclusion in the logistic regression equation for regression analysis. statistically significant parameters in the logistic regression equation were included in the final logistic regression prediction model. roc curves, calibration curves, and bootstrapping validation to calculate C-index were used to validate the prediction model for accuracy and stability 45 . The nomogram, calibration curve, and ROC curve are plotted using R software.