Introduction To address the challenges associated with global warming, greenhouse gases and especially carbon dioxide capture and storage is of fundament importance. Compared to the low energy efficient chemisorption-based methods, solid physisorbent materials such as activated carbons, zeolites, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs), which have lower heat capacities and require lower regeneration energy, have attracted increasing attention. In particular, MOFs and ZIFs as a subclass of MOFs have emerged as promising porous materials for greenhouse gas capture and storage. These materials have unique properties such as very high surface area, well defined porosity, high chemical and structural stability along with their modularity and tunable pore size/functionality 1 , 2 . All these properties present remarkable potential for achieving optimal CO 2 capture and storage performance. In the large ZIF family, ZIF-8 [Zn(MeIm) 2 , MeIm = 2-methylimidazolate] is the most well-known member. ZIF-8 is constructed by connecting each zinc ion tetrahedrally to four individual methylimidazolate ligands. It has a sodalite (SOD) topology containing the cages with a diameter of 11.6 Å and a cage aperture of 3.4 Å (Supplementary Fig. S1 ) 3 . These specific parameters make ZIF-8 to exhibit excellent adsorptive ability towards small gas molecules with appropriate kinetic diameters 4 , whose structural properties and gas adsorption performance including CO 2 have been extensively studied in the past decade under ambient conditions, high external pressures and at low temperatures by experimental and computational methods 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 . Recent investigations of pressure effect in different classes of MOFs are of particular interest which revealed highly diversified structural behaviours 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 . Among these, ZIFs and especially ZIF-8 under high external pressure have been examined extensively 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 . More significantly, several studies have shown that application of high external pressure can effectively tune CO 2 storage capability in MOFs/ZIFs 8 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 . This is because external pressure can change the MOF/ZIFs framework topology, alter pore size and shape, enhance host–guest interactions between framework and adsorbed CO 2 , and even create new adsorption sites, leading to an increased CO 2 adsorptive capability. However, at room temperature, solidification of CO 2 occurs at a pressure above 0.6 GPa 33 . This phase change of CO 2 severely limits further insertion of CO 2 into the cavities of ZIF-8 at higher pressures since solid CO 2 is immobile and not diffusible. This problem can be remediated if a mixture of solid CO 2 and ZIF-8 is heated to a temperature at which solid CO 2 existing outside ZIF-8 is mobilized, so that a significantly larger number of CO 2 molecules may be pressed into the framework of ZIFs by pressure. More importantly, the detailed structural information, pressure and temperature stability, as well as the CO 2 adsorption properties in ZIF-8 established in previous studies allows the understanding of the possible synergetic high-P and high-T effect on CO 2 adsorption in ZIF-8.In this work, using CO 2 phase diagram 33 as a guide and in situ IR spectroscopy as a tool, we examined CO 2 adsorption behaviour of ZIF-8 in a diamond-anvil cell (DAC) by simultaneously applying high temperature and pressure. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report that investigates the CO 2 intake behaviour at simultaneous high-P and high-T conditions for MOFs and especially for ZIF-8. Our results clearly show that under the carefully controlled high P–T conditions, CO 2 uptake of ZIF-8 is enhanced drastically, making it a promising material for CO 2 storage. Results A typical IR spectrum of a mixture of CO 2 and activated (empty) ZIF-8 loaded into a DAC (hereafter referred to as CO 2 /ZIF-8) under pressure (e.g., 1.02 GPa) along with the spectrum of activated ZIF-8 is shown in Fig. 1 . The observation of very strong CO 2 fundamental modes, ν 2 and ν 3 , confirms that CO 2 was successfully loaded into the DAC. However, these peaks are too intense and saturated, preventing further data analysis. As shown in literature work 34 , 35 , in such a situation, two CO 2 combination modes, (ν 3 + 2ν 2 ) and (ν 3 + ν 1 ) observed at around 3600 and 3710 cm -1 in the IR spectra can be more effectively used to monitor the behaviour of adsorbed CO 2 inside porous framework 29 , 30 . It is worth noting that at 1.02 GPa, each combination mode split into a doublet. The shape and position of the sharper high-frequency component for each mode are almost identical to those of pure CO 2 , suggesting that it is due to the CO 2 outside the ZIF-8 framework in solid phase, whereas the boarder low-frequency component is due to the CO 2 molecules that have entered the framework of ZIF-8 similar to that observed in other MOFs we reported previously 29 , 30 . The relative intensity of these bands forms the basis for quantitative analysis of CO 2 in different environment under specific pressure and temperature conditions. Figure 1 Mid-IR spectra of activated ZIF-8 at ambient pressure (blue) and CO 2 loaded ZIF-8 at 1.02 GPa (red). The inset shows the comparison between the activated (bottom) and CO 2 loaded ZIF-8 (top) in the spectral region of the CO 2 combination modes. Full size image The selected variable temperature IR spectra of the CO 2 combination modes of the CO 2 /ZIF-8 collected at a fixed pressure of 0.63 GPa are shown in Fig. 2 a. At room temperature, each combination mode exhibits two components, indicating that the CO 2 molecules in the sample chamber experience two different environments. According to the CO 2 phase diagram 33 , the CO 2 residing outside ZIF-8 should exist as a crystalline solid. As mentioned above, the high-frequency sharp component of each combination mode originates from the solid CO 2 outside the ZIF-8 framework. The CO 2 molecules adsorbed inside the framework of ZIF-8, on the other hand, give rise to the broader low-frequency component. At 36 °C, both the high-frequency components of (ν 3 + 2ν 2 ) and (ν 3 + ν 1 ) modes become less intense, while the low-frequency component of each mode becomes broader, suggesting that the solid CO 2 residing outside the framework undergoes a solid-to-fluid transition at current temperature and pressure. Markedly reduced intensity of the peak associated with solid CO 2 implies that a significant portion of the CO 2 that initially resides outside the framework at room temperature has now entered the framework at this temperature. Upon further heating at 40 °C, the intensity of the high-frequency component representing solid CO 2 vanishes completely, indicating that all the solid CO 2 initially residing outside the ZIF-8 framework has largely entered the framework due to the temperature enhanced fluidity. After cooling the DAC system down to room temperature, the higher frequency component of the doublet of both (ν 3 + 2ν 2 ) and (ν 3 + ν 1 ) modes reappears, but the intensity is much weaker compared to its low-frequency counterpart, suggesting that the CO 2 outside ZIF-8 recrystallizes upon cooling. This observation unambiguously indicates that after the heating cycle, the number of CO 2 molecules adsorbed inside ZIF-8 at room temperature is larger than that before heating. The ratio of CO 2 amount adsorbed inside the framework to those outside ZIF-8 can be estimated quasi-quantitatively from the integrated peak areas obtained by spectral deconvolution. Figure 2 CO 2 adsorption capacity of ZIF-8 in percentage as a function of pressure and temperature. The data are obtained along a heating sequence at a fixed pressure followed by cooling (quenched) and analyzed using the characteristic combination IR mode of CO 2 . A maximum enhancement (by 80%) of CO 2 adsorption by heating was achieved at 1.15 GPa (see text). Full size image The two overlapping bands of the (ν 3 + ν 1 ) mode in each spectrum of the CO 2 /ZIF-8 at different temperatures and under a fixed pressure of 0.63 GPa were deconvoluted (Supplementary Fig. S2 ) and the normalized peak areas are listed in Supplementary Table S1 . Before heating, the fraction of CO 2 inside the ZIF-8 at room temperature is 55%; it then increases to 62% upon heating to 36 °C. At 40 °C, the normalized peak area representing CO 2 inside the framework reaches 78%, and the rest of the CO 2 remains as a fluid outside the framework (Supplementary Fig. S2 ). Upon cooling down to room temperature, the normalized peak area of the adsorbed CO 2 decreases to 62%. Thus, the amount of CO 2 adsorbed in the framework at room temperature and a pressure of 0.63 GPa increased by 13% compared to that before heating. It is thus apparent that simultaneously applying high temperature and pressure enhances ZIF-8’s CO 2 adsorption capability. More importantly, a larger amount of CO 2 is trapped irreversibly inside the framework upon cooling to room temperature. Such permanent heating-enhanced CO 2 adsorption of ZIF-8 framework under a confined condition has not been observed for any other MOF materials to the best of our knowledge. To further explore and optimize the synergetic effect of high pressure and high temperature on enhancing CO 2 uptake, additional variable temperature experiments at different pressures were also performed. The selected variable temperature IR spectra of the CO 2 /ZIF-8 at a fixed pressure of 1.15 GPa are illustrated Fig. 2 b. At 61 °C, the IR spectrum with sharp (ν 3 + 2ν 2 ) and (ν 3 + ν 1 ) modes clearly shows that CO 2 inside the sample chamber remains solid at this pressure. When heated to higher temperatures such as 69, 73 and 77 °C, all solid CO 2 appears melted with most of the CO 2 molecules transported into the framework of ZIF-8 by diffusion. Upon cooling from 77 °C down to room temperature, both (ν 3 + 2ν 2 ) and (ν 3 + ν 1 ) modes remain as a single broad peak, suggesting that no solid CO 2 phase is recovered. This result is significant as at room temperature and 1.15 GPa, any CO 2 existing outside ZIF-8 framework should be in solid phase. Among other additional CO 2 adsorption measurements following different P–T paths, we found that 1.15 GPa is close to an optimized pressure at which CO 2 adsorption enhancement is maximized upon heating to a temperature near the melting point of CO 2 . Such a mild pressure–temperature condition can be readily realized in other devices such as multi-anvil press to allow scaling up. The normalized peak area (Supplementary Table S2 ) indicates that at 1.15 GPa and room temperature, 54% of the total CO 2 are initially adsorbed inside the cages of ZIF-8 and 46% of CO 2 resides outside the framework as a solid. Apparently upon heating followed by cooling back to room temperature, all the CO 2 molecules have now migrated and been trapped inside the ZIF-8 framework. A careful inspection reveals that upon cooling down to room temperature, the peak due to the (ν 3 + 2ν 2 ) mode has an asymmetric peak profile; the deconvoluted spectrum (Supplementary Fig. S3 ) shows a small broad peak with a Gaussian profile at the high-frequency side of the main peak, indicating that there are two non-equivalent CO 2 inside ZIF-8 (see discussion below). The heat treatment at 1.15 GPa leads to an 85% increase in the amount of adsorbed CO 2 in ZIF-8, compared to only 13% enhancement of CO 2 uptake under 0.63 GPa. We further explored the CO 2 uptake behaviour in ZIF-8 framework under other P–T conditions extensively (up to 2.4 GPa and over 145°C) and found 1.15 GPa is the closest to an optimal pressure under which the heating-enhanced CO 2 adsorption achieves the maximum. These findings are summarized in Fig. 3 . Figure 3 CO 2 adsorption capacity of ZIF-8 in percentage as a function of pressure and temperature. The data are obtained along a heating sequence at a fixed pressure followed by cooling (quenched) and analyzed using the characteristic combination IR mode of CO 2 . A maximum enhancement (by 80%) of CO 2 adsorption by heating was achieved at 1.15 GPa (see text). Full size image Discussion The substantial difference in adsorptive capacity improvement under different pressures is intriguing and can be closely attributed to the framework structure under different pressures and temperatures. Previous work by Moggach et al. 21 showed that high external pressure can increase the effective pore size of ZIF-8 by changing the linker orientation, which is so called “gate opening” effect. Hobday et al. further established a correlation between the pressure and the rotation angle (θ) of the imidazole rings describing the pore opening (Fig. 4 ) 26 . Such rotation of the linker results in an increase in the unit cell volume and solvent-accessible volume 6 , 26 . In the present case, it appears that at 0.63 GPa, the pressure is not high enough to fully rotate the imidazole ring to open the gate completely. Consequently, at this pressure, the CO 2 uptake has not reached the maximum even though the fluidity of CO 2 is significantly enhanced by heating. The work by Moggach et al. 21 elegantly demonstrated that ZIF-8 transforms to a new phase at 1.47 GPa (a pressure close to 1.15 GPa explored in this study) where both the pore volume and the size of the linking channels increase. At 69 °C and 1.15 GPa, we believe that the small and broad high-frequency peak in the deconvoluted spectrum (Supplementary Fig. S3 ) represents 22% of CO 2 molecules that are adsorbed in the channels surrounding each sodalite cage and are distinctively different than those 78% in the cages. These channels are otherwise blocked by imidazole linkers and not accessible at the ambient pressure. The CO 2 molecules adsorbed in the channels are tightly confined compared to those inside the cages. Consequently, the CO 2 vibrations appeared at higher frequencies due to the strong confinement. The fact that no solid phase of CO 2 reforms upon cooling down to room temperature implies that all the CO 2 molecules are trapped tightly inside ZIF-8 due to the strong interaction of CO 2 with the framework under pressure. The combined pressure–temperature effect on the structural details of ZIF-8 framework is illustrated in Fig. 4 . Figure 4 Schematics of CO 2 adsorption and structural change in the CO 2 loaded ZIF-8 framework from near ambient pressure and room temperature (left) to 0.63 GPa and 40 °C (upper right) and to 1.15 GPa and 69 °C (lower right). The pressure-dependent “gate” opening effect is illustrated by the rotation angle of the methylimidazole rings (see text). Full size image To further confirm that fluidity of CO 2 under applied pressure by heating is critically important to the large enhancement of CO 2 uptake of ZIF-8, we heated the CO 2 /ZIF-8 mixture in a DAC at temperature up to above 145 °C under a higher pressure of 2.41 GPa. CO 2 phase diagram shows that the free CO 2 residing outside the framework should remain as a solid in the entire T, P range employed. Indeed, the high-frequency component of the (ν 3 + ν 1 ) mode representing solid CO 2 persists in the spectra throughout the entire temperature range (Supplementary Fig. S4 ). No CO 2 uptake enhancement was observed either during heating or upon cooling down to room temperature (Supplementary Fig. S4 ). These results unambiguously indicate that neither heating solid CO 2 nor applying pressure alone can sufficiently improve the CO 2 adsorptive capability of ZIF-8. Careful inspection of the room temperature spectra acquired at 2.41 GPa before and after heating reveals that the intensity of the high-frequency peak corresponding to solid CO 2 actually becomes slightly stronger with respect to the low-frequency component due to the CO 2 inside ZIF-8, implying that the CO 2 adsorptive ability is slightly reduced after the heat treatment (Supplementary Fig. S4 ). A possible reason is that the framework might have been partially damaged by exposing the ZIF-8 to harsher conditions (i.e. 2.41 GPa and 145 °C), resulting in a slightly reduced porosity for adsorption. The quantitative CO 2 intake enhancement and detailed CO 2 adsorption mechanism at simultaneously high P–T conditions should be verified by synchrotron single crystal diffraction measurements as well as computational modelling in the future. Moreover, whether the synergetic P–T effect is applicable to other MOFs in different classes invites more systematic study on other MOFs. Conclusions In summary, using in situ IR spectroscopy, we demonstrate that simultaneously applying moderate temperature and pressure to a CO 2 /ZIF-8 mixture can remarkably enhance the CO 2 adsorptive capacity of ZIF-8. Specifically, the thermal treatment was applied simultaneously at high pressures up to 2.41 GPa. The optimized T, P condition established in this study is 69 °C and 1.15 GPa, under which an 85% increase in CO 2 uptake is achieved. Such a drastic enhancement of CO 2 adsorption ability is attributed to the synergetic effect of high T and P. High temperature significantly enhances the transport property of CO 2 , allowing CO 2 to effectively diffuse into the framework of ZIF-8. Meanwhile, high mechanical pressure changes the effective pore size and shape as well as the linker orientation to open the “gate”, facilitating the CO 2 adsorption. The change in the linker orientation also makes the channels connecting the cages accessible to CO 2 as additional adsorption sites at high pressure. This work demonstrates that gas adsorption capability of MOFs and ZIFs can be drastically improved by applying moderate pressure and temperature, making ZIFs a promising class of materials for practical CO 2 storage applications. Methods ZIF-8 was synthesized solvothermally and activated by following the literature method 36 . Briefly, A mixture of 2.5 mmol Zn(NO 3 ) 2 ·6H 2 O (Alfa Aesar, 98%) and 0.15 mol 2-methylimidazole (Sigma-Aldrich, 98%) were dissolved in 100 mL of deionized water and stirred at room temperature for 24 h. The resulting white crystals were harvested via vacuum filtration and washed with 10 mL of methanol for three times. Activation of ZIF-8 samples was achieved by degassing via dynamic vacuum and heating for 8 h at 150 ℃. The identity and purity of the activated product were verified by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) to show the successful removal of the solvent to achieve an activated (empty) ZIF-8 framework. (Supplementary Fig. S5 ). The PXRD pattern was recorded using a Inel CPS X-ray diffractometer operating with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). The reflections were collected at 2θ values ranging between 5 and 40°, using an increment of 0.01° with an acquisition rate of 4°/min. Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) measurements were performed by Beijing HENVEN HQT-3 instrument. The sample was heated from 25° to 800 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min under a N 2 atmosphere. The TGA profile of the activated sample (Supplementary Fig. S6 ) shows no weight loss below around 600 °C, which clearly indicates that all the solvent molecules were removed during activation process and the activation is complete. The weight loss at the temperature above 600 °C is due to the decomposition 36 , indicating the ZIF-8 is stable up to c.a. 600 °C. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) measurements were conducted using a Thermo Scientific Apreo S SEM instrument operating at 30 kV. SEM images of as-made and activated ZIF-8 samples are shown in Fig. 5 . ZIF-8 crystals display a consistent truncated octahedral shape with uniform particle dimensions, in agreement with previously reported studies 36 . The surface area of activated ZIF-8 was measured using BET method with a BELSORP-MAX instrument with N 2 (99.999%) at 77 K. Prior to N 2 isotherm measurement, 100 mg of ZIF-8 was achieved by degassing via dynamic vacuum and heating for 8 h at 150 ℃. N 2 adsorption experiments at pressures up to 1 bar was then performed on activated ZIF-8 by the BELSORP-MAX. The N 2 adsorption isotherms measured for activated ZIF-8 sample is shown in Supplementary Fig. S7 . The BET area derived is 1686.7 m 2 /g, surpassing the best value (i.e., 1550 m 2 /g) reported in a previous literature 36 , indicating the successful activation and excellent porosity of ZIF-8 achieved in this study. Figure 5 SEM images of as-made (left column) and activated (right column) ZIF-8 samples at different magnifications. Full size image To carry out in situ high T-P experiments, a DAC (Supplementary Fig. S8 ) equipped with a pair of type II diamonds (600 µm culet size) was used for all IR measurements. The sample chamber was prepared on a stainless-steel gasket, with 60–80 µm in thickness and 300 µm in diameter. A few ruby chips were pre-loaded into the sample chamber for pressure calibration 37 . For sample preparation, in order to maximize the CO 2 loading, the sample chamber was firstly half filled with activated (empty) ZIF-8. The piston side of the DAC was then immersed in a liquid nitrogen bath to cool down the system. During this process, the sample chamber was covered with a plastic film to avoid moisture condensation. When the temperature of the gasket was below the melting point of dry ice (i.e., < 78.5 °C), the plastic film was removed, and the CO 2 gas was introduced into the sample chamber. Upon closing the DAC, a low pressure is needed to hold CO 2 in the sample chamber for further measurements. The FTIR spectrometer used is customized for in situ high pressure measurements, with the details described in previous publications 38 . In this work, to apply high pressure and high temperature simultaneously and take IR measurement in situ, the regular DAC stage for room temperature measurement was replaced by a custom-designed heating stage, which is composed of a resistively heated copper cell holder, and a glass wool board for heat insulation. By placing the DAC onto this stage, high temperature (up to ~ 500 °C) could be achieved by powering up the heating element with AC current from a power supply with a temperature controller (omega iSeries) to regulate the heat delivery and to control the temperature of the DAC. Temperature is measured by attaching a calibrated thermocouple to the back of the diamond. The accuracy of the temperature measurement is ± 2.3 °C in the temperature range from 50–80 °C and ± 5.0 °C from 80 to 200 °C.