Introduction Metabolic syndrome (MetS), a condition caused by the presence of a cluster of risk factors—abdominal obesity (large waist circumference) and two or more other risks, elevated triglycerides, high blood pressure, impaired fasting blood glucose, or low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), increases the chance of developing cardiometabolic diseases like heart disease, stroke, and diabetes 1 . Metabolic syndrome is a global epidemic 2 , 3 . About one in four of the world population has metabolic syndrome in 2015 3 . Taiwan’s national metabolic syndrome prevalence increases onefold decennially, from 13.6 (1993–1996) to 30.0% (2013–2016) over 20 years 4 , 5 . A substantial proportion of Taiwan older women are estimated at high risk of metabolic syndrome because women with low socioeconomic status (low level of education or/and incomes) have an increased risk of metabolic syndrome 6 , 7 , 8 and that as high as 86% of older women in Taiwan were low-educated (no education, 47.4%; 6 years or less, 38.4%) 9 . Since individuals with metabolic syndrome have increased risks of cardiovascular diseases, type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular and all-cause mortality 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , early and effective management/treatment is crucially needed for this specific population. For management of metabolic syndrome, lifestyle behavior modification is essential, that is to eat healthy foods—whole grains, fruits, vegetables, lean meats, skinless poultry, non-fried fish, and low-fat or fat-free dairy products; limit unhealthy foods—processed foods, saturated and trans fats, red meat, sodium, and added sugars; become physically active—moderate-vigorous physical activity at least 30 min a day, and most day of the week; and lose weight 10 . Changing lifestyle behavior relies greatly on self-discipline and self-responsibility to consciously and actively initiate and repeat doing something new, something different, or quit doing to bring the unwanted conditions under control or/and improve them. It is a self-management process whose effectiveness directly results from its quality. The effectiveness of self-management interventions for improving healthy lifestyle behaviors and associated health outcomes have been studied among patients with cardiovascular disease 14 , patients with type 2 diabetes 15 , middle- and old-aged women 16 , middle-aged adults with metabolic syndrome 17 , social disadvantaged (low socioeconomic status or ethnoracial minority) patients with diabetes 18 , low socioeconomic status patients with chronic conditions (diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, or multi-morbidities) 19 , 20 . However, to our best knowledge, no studies were found concerning low-education or low socioeconomic status women with metabolic syndrome, a large specific population who urgently needs an effective self-management protocol. An effective self-management intervention should be holistic with diverse approaches 18 , 21 , 22 and is characterized by the delivery of healthy lifestyle education 23 and skills, environmental, social, and peer support 20 , 24 ; and monitoring of health outcomes. As such, we mainly focused on five dimensions in the construct of the self-management intervention: lifestyle modification 25 , 26 , goal setting 27 , coaching and peer support 28 , 29 , problem-solving 30 , 31 , and self-monitoring 32 , 33 . Aims and hypotheses This study aimed to examine the efficacy of a multidimensional self-management intervention on low-education women with metabolic syndrome. We hypothesized that the intervention would improve individual-level health-promotion behaviors—physical activity and healthy diet, and metabolic syndrome and its related biomarkers during and after the intervention period compared with the attention control arm. Methods Design This study was an 18-month two-arm parallel cluster randomized controlled trial with a 1:1 allocation ratio. Recruitment period was from September to October 2017 and follow-up period was from November 2017 to April 2019. The intervention arm received a self-management program, while the attention-control arm received a health education leaflet about metabolic syndrome care. Three assessments were performed—at baseline, six months, and 18 months. Blinding the study participants, investigators, volunteers, and outcomes assessors (except the technicians who did the blood analysis) was not possible because they knew what type of treatment was being received or delivered to engage in that treatment. Participants and setting Potential participants were recruited from four conveniently chosen communities in northern Taiwan. With an estimated median distance of 8.35 km (range 7.2–9.7 km), contamination, spill-over of intervention effects to the control, was considered minimal as communications or acquaintance between the intervention and control arm were unlikely. Having abdominal adiposity (waist circumference ≥ 80 cm in Chinese females or body mass index (BMI)> 30 kg/m 2 , plus two or more of the following define the presence of metabolic syndrome according to the International Diabetes Federation 1 : (1) triglycerides ≥ 150 mg/dL or specific treatment for this lipid abnormality; (2) high-density lipoprotein cholesterol < 50 mg/dL in females or specific treatment for this lipid abnormality; (3) systolic blood pressure ≥ 130 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure ≥ 85 mm Hg, or treatment of previously diagnosed hypertension; and (4) fasting plasma glucose ≥ 100 mg/dL, or previously diagnosed type 2 diabetes. Inclusion criteria were (1) adult women with age ≥ 50 years, (2) low education, defined as having less than 6 years of education or being primary school graduates, (3) presence of metabolic syndrome, (4) community-dwelling, and (5) no hearing and visual acuity difficulties. Unconscious or individuals with cognitive impairment or dementia were excluded. Using the statistical power analysis of G*Power 3.1.7 software 34 , a two-arm, three-level repeated measures analysis of variance with an assumed within-in-group correlation coefficient of 0.5 requires a sample size of 62 (31 participants per group) to achieve an 80% statistical power at 5% significance level and an effect size of 0.3. Using Tran et al.’s cluster randomized controlled trial 35 consisting of Vietnamese community adults with metabolic syndrome, 175 (82% women) in the intervention (physical activity and nutrition) and 162 (78% women) in the control arm, we calculated an average effect size of 0.2993 from seven related and statistically significant biomarkers using Morris’s method 36 . We referred to Tran et al.’s study for effect size to calculate our required sample size because it involved metabolic syndromic community adult Asians with a high proportion of women possessing physical characteristics similar to our study population. Recruitment and randomization One-hundred and sixty women were screened initially, 55 without metabolic syndrome were excluded, two declined. The four community units with 103 women were randomly assigned to either the intervention or control arm by drawing lots enclosed in sealed opaque envelopes. Each arm consisted of two community units. Two participants were lost in each arm during the follow-up because of moving or loss of contact. Ninety-nine participants, 51 in the intervention arm and 48 in the control arm, completed the study. The retention rate was 96.2% for the intervention arm and 96.0% for the control arm. The principal investigator, enrolled and assigned participants in random order to study arms. We received no complaints of related discomfort or injuries from the participants. The study design flowchart is shown in Fig. 1 . Figure 1 Study design flowchart. Full size image The self-management program The intervention consisted of five dimensions—lifestyle modification, goal setting, coaching and peer support, problem-solving, and self-monitoring. Lifestyle modification We applied three of the five World Health Organization’s Key Actions for Health Promotion 37 —create supportive environments, strengthen community action, and develop personal skills 38 , 39 . Providing supportive environments and accessible resources We worked with the intervention community managers to identify vicinity sites, such as community-based activity centers, for administering exercise classes, nutrition courses, and related physical and clinical assessments. Providing simple exercise skills and group course We offered daytime community health volunteer-supervised aerobic exercise classes for 40 min a day, 5 days a week, throughout the 18-month intervention. Exercise specialists designed the exercises, which composed of three parts—warm-up, main activity (aerobics), and cool down (stretching). Additional supervised 40-min and 5 days a week nighttime walking session were offered. Providing nutrition courses and simple healthy meal plans To implement the dietary guidelines 10 , 40 , we held two monthly 1.5-h nutrition courses during the first month of intervention. Each course consisted of lectures and presentations of simple diet plans and samples of healthy meals—briefly, reduced salt and oil intake; proper portions of whole grains, vegetables, fruits, proteins, dairy products, and nuts. Participants learned about the association of subtypes of consumed oil consisting of polyunsaturated fatty acids, monounsaturated fatty acids, saturated fatty acids, and trans-fatty acids; with cardiometabolic risks. They experienced the sample meals and studied their proper proportion of vegetables, fruits, protein, and carbohydrates. Laminated pictures of healthy meal plans were distributed to post on kitchen walls or refrigerator doors to cue healthy dieting 38 , 39 . Goal setting The goal was to engage in moderate to vigorous exercise 30 min or more per day, five days or more per week, and to adhere to the 2018 Taiwan’s Daily Food Guide 41 —a consumption of 2.5–4 bowls (500–800 g) of whole grains (one-third being refined), three to eight servings (300–800 g) of proteins (legume, beans, soy bean, fish, seafood, egg, or meat), 1.5–2 glasses (360–480 mL) of dairy products, three to five servings (300–500 g) of vegetables, two to four servings (200–400 g) of fruits, four to eight servings of oils and nuts—three to seven table spoons (15–35 g) of oils and one serving (10 g) of nuts. The adequate amount was proportional to individual’s estimated energy requirement. Coaching and peer support One nurse investigator, one trained community health volunteer, and 6–7 participants formed a peer support group. Each group took a 12-hour course provided by the research team and the metabolic syndrome experts to learn about exercise, healthy diet, behavior change, communication skills, and methods of physical measurements (body weight, height, waist circumference, and blood pressure). To empower participants to meet the goal, the peers (nurses and community health volunteers) set the same goal, provided education, and shared experience to encourage participants by phone calls or LINE messages once weekly during the first six months and once monthly thereafter. Problem-solving The most common problem encountered was the concern of the safety commuting to exercise sites on rainy days. The community health volunteers and the participants conferred to reach feasible alternatives, such as following the exercise videos shown on YouTube or digital video discs. Self-monitoring The intervention participants were encouraged to visit nearby support sites monthly to monitor their body weight, body mass index, waist circumference, blood pressure, and fasting blood glucose. To monitor and reinforce healthy activities, each participant kept a health passport containing personal measurements recorded by the community health volunteers, and weekly exercise and dietary logs entered by crossing a checklist to allow for the low literacy of participants. Data collection To obtain accurate and quality data from low- or no-literacy participants, trained investigators used fact-to-face interviews to ensure complete cooperative responses, capture verbal and non-verbal cues, and control interactions. There were neither missing data in demographic characteristics, medical history, lifestyle behaviors nor biomarker assessments at baseline and follow-up. Participant characteristics Participant characteristics included demographic data—age, employment, education, and marital status; medical history—diseases and medicine use; smoking and drinking. Biomarkers of metabolic syndrome We followed the World Health Organization’s Physical Measurements Guideline 42 to measure body weight, height, waist circumference, and blood pressure. Body weight was measured with a calibrated electronic weight scale to the nearest 0.1 kg and body height with a stadiometer to the nearest 0.1 cm in light clothing without footwear. Body mass index was calculated by dividing weight (kilograms) by the square of height (meters). Waist circumference was measured with an anthropometric measuring tape to the nearest 0.1 cm at the mid-line between the lowest rib and iliac crest in a standing position. Blood pressure was measured twice, separated by at least 15 min using an OMRON arm sphygmomanometer (HEM-7130) after at least 5 min of sitting rest. The average of the two measurements was used. Fasting blood samples were collected by registered nurses and measured by an affiliated hospital clinical laboratory for fasting blood glucose, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and triglycerides using enzymatic assays with a Hitachi LAboSPECT 008AS analyzer (Tokyo, Japan). Leisure-time physical activity Leisure-time physical activity (LTPA) was assessed using two questions modified from studies of Gionet and Godin 43 and Chang et al. 44 : (1) Have you done any leisure-time physical activity for 30 min or more a day, with a significant increase in breathing or sweating in the past six months? Examples of leisure-time physical activity include brisk/fast walking, social or folk dance, Chinese traditional health-promoting exercise, and the like, (2) If you do, how often does it happen? Regular leisure-time physical activity was defined as having moderate-to-vigorous exercise at leisure time 30 min or more a day, five days or more a week for the past six months. Healthy diet behaviors Participants were asked six questions based on Daily Food Guide of the Taiwan Health Promotion Administration, Ministry of Health and Welfare 41 and Chang et al.’ study 38 . These questions asked about participant’s intake rate of whole grains (≥ 2.5 bowls/day), vegetables (≥ 3 servings/day), fruits (≥ 2 servings/day), proteins (≥ 4 servings/day), dairy products (≥ 1.5 glasses/day), and nuts (≥ 1 serving/day). Each question was answerable using a five-point Likert-type scale: 1 = never, 2 = seldom (1–2 days/week), 3 = occasionally (3 days/week), 4 = often (4–5 days per week), and 5 = almost every day (6–7 days per week). The average of the sum of the six scores represented the overall rate. Data analysis We used the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) software version 27.0 (International Business Machines Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA). All statistical tests were two-sided with 0.05 levels of statistical significance (α). Descriptive analysis included means, standard deviations, and frequency distribution (percentages) for the demographic, lifestyle behaviors, and biomarkers of metabolic syndrome. A number of the baseline intervention and control arm continuous variables failed the Shapiro–Wilk test of normality. The Chi-square test for dichotomous variables and the Mann–Whitney U test for continuous and ordinal variables examined baseline differences between the intervention and control arms. Generalized estimating equations (GEE) compared rates of change between the intervention and control arms from baseline to the six- and 18-month assessments. The effect size was obtained by pooling estimates across both pretest and posttest standard deviations for weighting the differences of the pre-post-means to account for intervention’s influence on the standard deviation. Additionally, a bias correction was applied 36 $${\text{Effect size }} = {\text{ bias correction}} \times \left[ {\left( {{\text{mean of post-treatment}} - {\text{mean of pre-treatment}}} \right) - \left( {{\text{mean of post-control}} - {\text{mean of pre-control}}} \right)} \right]/{\text{SD}}_{{{\text{pre}} + {\text{post}}}} .$$ Effect size for frequency data was computed based on Binomial Effect Size Display 45 , 46 . All statistical analyses included only participants who completed the study, 51 in the intervention arm and 48 in the control arm. Intention-to-treat analysis was not applied. Ethics approval and consent to participate We followed the declaration of Helsinki. The ethical committee of a medical center in Taiwan approved this study on February 15, 2017 (No. 201602059A3). All participants were assured that their anonymity and confidentiality would be preserved and that they could withdraw from the study at any time and for any reason. Signed informed consent was obtained from each participant before enrollment into the study. Results Baseline measurements Participants were 51 to 75 years old with a mean of 60.6 years (SD = 8.7 years), 79.8% were married, 3% currently smoked, none currently drank alcoholic beverages, and 56.6% were on chronic medication such as anti-hypertension drugs. There were no statistical significant differences ( P > 0.05) between the two arms in demographic characteristics, medical history, heathy diet, regular LTPA, metabolic syndrome rates and biomarkers at baseline (Tables 1 , 2 ). Table 1 Baseline demographic data and medical history. Full size table Table 2 Baseline, 6- and 18-month outcomes, GEE model of group-by-time interaction effects, and effect sizes. Full size table Effects of the self-management intervention Table 2 shows the baseline, six- and 18-month outcomes, the GEE model of group-by-time interaction effects, and effect sizes. Compared with the control, the intervention had improvements ( P < 0.05) in the rate of healthy food intake—dairy products and nuts at six and 18 months and vegetables at 18 months. The rate of LTPA improved at six and 18 months. For biomarkers, fasting blood glucose improved at six and 18 months, whereas body weight, BMI, waist circumference, fasting blood glucose, and HDL-C improved at 18 months. The number of MetS risks and the rate of MetS reduced at six and 18 months. At the end of the intervention, dairy product intake had the largest effect size (0.88) among healthy foods, HDL-C (1.1) among biomarkers, and the rate of LTPA (1.41) among all outcomes. Discussion This study provides novel evidence that low-education women with metabolic syndrome can benefit from an 18-month multidimensional self-management program consisting of lifestyle modification (physical activity and healthy diet), goal setting, coaching and peer support, problem-solving, and self-monitoring. The program was designed to implement research suggestions and the World Health Organization’s five key action areas for health promotion 37 . Compared with the baseline, the intervention arm demonstrated improvement in vegetables, dairy products, and nuts consumption, rate of regular leisure-time physical activity, body weight, body mass index, waist circumference, fasting blood glucose, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, number of metabolic syndrome risks, and rate of metabolic syndrome. While there is a lack of data indicating the efficacy of self-management intervention for low-education women with metabolic syndrome, our data showed cardiometabolic benefits in line with and supplementary to previous intervention studies for various metabolic syndromic populations, for example, community middle- and old-aged Korean women 16 , Taiwanese community obese adults 38 , Taiwanese rural-area older adults 47 , Northern Chinese out-patients adults 48 , Northern Chinese hospital-discharged patients 49 , Vietnamese community adults 35 , and Iranian health-center adults 50 . A comparable women-specific study which was a four-week pretest and posttest non-randomized control trial 16 consisting of 30 middle-aged and older Korean women with metabolic syndrome, who received a self-management intervention including group education on lifestyle behaviors, a face-to-face individual counseling plus weekly follow-up telephone calls, a pedometer and a diary for self-monitoring, had similar improvements as found in our study—body mass index, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, triglycerides, number of metabolic syndrome risks, 10-year risk estimates, rate of metabolic syndrome, weekly frequency and duration of walking, and sitting time. However, the intervention period was relatively short to evaluate the medium- and long-term effects. Our study, with a more extended intervention period, showed considerable improvements after an 18-month follow-up, of which some were seen after the first 6 months. The overall metabolic syndrome risk, indicated by the metabolic syndrome rate, dropped almost 40 percentage points in the intervention arm at the six-month assessment, and showed a 25 percentage point difference ( P < 0.05) between the intervention and control arms at the 18-month assessment (Table 2 ). These changes were evidenced by a significant reduction in the associated criteria risk number (a mean of 0.8) and their improvements, including reduced waist circumference, reduced fasting blood glucose, and elevated high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (Table 2 ). Screening for metabolic syndrome, particularly among low-education women who are subject to higher cardiometabolic risks 6 , 7 , 8 , allows identifying those individuals for whom early lifestyle changes are most likely to improve health outcomes 51 and help relieve the financial burden of potential medical expenses for those with an already difficult life. The most significant improvement was physical activity behavior, with an effect size of 1.41 in the rate of meeting regular LTPA at the six-month assessment (Table 2 ), corresponding to a 57.5% probability of success increase using the Rosenthal’s Binomial Effect Size Display (phi correlation coefficient = 0.575, number needed to treat = 1.74) 45 , 52 , mainly attributed to goal settings that could be realized by participating in peer-led group-based exercise classes offered twice daily on weekdays. Adequate physical exercise is effective in reducing cardiometabolic risks 53 , 54 . Our data showed that nearly 60% (intervention, 55%; control, 58%) reported having hypertension, and about 50% were taking anti-hypertensive medication (intervention, 51%; control, 46%) (Table 1 ). Exercise, medication, or exercise combined with medication all lower blood pressure among hypertensive adults; however, the combined effect is less than the sum of individual effects 55 , 56 . We speculated that the exercise effect on blood pressure in half of the intervention participants might have been compromised by a strong confounder (anti-hypertensive medication) in light of an attenuated additive effect (exercise + medication) in the intervention arm compared with a similar effect (medication) in the control arm. Furthermore, to prevent injuries and accommodate the older age and gender of the participants, the exercise intensity might have been set too low to stimulate a physiological response strong enough to produce a significant training effect on blood pressure 57 . Similar to other studies, we did not observe a reduction in triglycerides. A meta-analysis including seven ≥ 4 weeks of randomized control/clinical trials on adults with metabolic syndrome showed that triglycerides levels were not significantly improved 54 . Likewise, in a scoping review of group-based lifestyle intervention on adults with metabolic syndrome, four out of six (67%) studies did not significantly improve triglyceride levels 58 . Among the six healthy food intake rates, half of them, vegetables, dairy products, and nuts, increased significantly in the intervention arm; as a whole, it improved progressively ( P < 0.05) compared with the control, as indicated by increasing effect sizes over time (Table 2 ). Vegetables, a great source of vitamins, minerals, phytonutrients (antioxidants and anti-inflammatory agents), and dietary fibers, were not initially consumed daily but approached daily consumption of recommended servings in the intervention arm. Viewing as non-staple and pricey, dairy products’ and nuts’ recommended servings were “seldom” met (1–2 days/week) at baseline; still, the intervention managed to raise it to an “occasionally” intake rate (3 days/week). The intervention failed to improve the intake rate of recommended servings of whole grains, fruits, and proteins. Refined grains, mainly white rice, have long been the Chinese's primary food, replacing them with or adding unrefined grains may create resistance. The intake rates of recommended servings for proteins and fruits were stable, 3–4 days/week during intervention; whether related to personal preferences/biases, food accessibility, or meal providers required further investigation. Future studies can explore effective strategies for enhancing low-education women’s health literacy and knowledge to mediate self-managed diet behavior 23 , 59 . We observed that the change in physical activity behaviors was more than in dietary behaviors. Our data showed that none of the intervention and control participants reported “almost every day” (6–7 days/week) eating the recommended servings of all six healthy foods before and after the intervention. In the intervention group, only one in four reported “often” (4–5 days/week) at baseline, which increased to one in three after the intervention. Whether exercise behavior is easier to modify because of its group nature, thus having more peer support 22 , or dietary habit is more difficult to modify because of its individualized nature warrants further investigation. The improvements observed in this study are likely attributed more to exercise than diet behavior changes. Nevertheless, adherence to Daily Food Guide and a healthy diet are associated with lower risks of metabolic syndrome 60 and all-cause and cardiovascular mortalities 61 , data shown in the National Nutrition and Health Survey in Taiwan. Adopting a high-quality diet emphasizing good (nutritious) foods, the intervention arm participants might have reduced energy intake, despite that nutritional status, for example, the three-day and 24-h dietary recall, had not been assessed. Their body weight and BMI, which were not statistically different at baseline, were significantly ( P < 0.05) less than those of the control arm, − 2.7 kg (− 4.1%) and − 1.2 kg/m 2 (− 4.4%) at 18 months, respectively. However, better weight control might have been due in part, if not all, to increased physical activity during follow-up. Though not assessed, participants' unhealthy food consumption might have reduced secondary to increased healthy food intake. Future studies are recommended to include nutritional status, energy intake, and physical activity energy expenditure assessments if resources are available. Individuals with metabolic syndrome might also gain cognitive benefits from a multidimensional self-management intervention, such as health responsibility 50 , stress management 48 , 50 , self-efficacy 48 , and depression 49 . The low socioeconomic status or disadvantaged group is likely facing a dilemma related to resources and condition demands 14 , 62 , 63 —they have higher levels of overall social complexity (work/income insecurity, family needs, trauma history) and higher prevalence of chronic diseases at earlier ages 64 ; on the other hand, their burden increase by self-management interventions, especially those requiring regular attendances or homework. Reducing burden or increasing access to resources is thus essential for this particular population 62 . Our intervention that made use of phone consultations 65 , problem-solving of specific barriers, integrating healthcare with social services, and directed interventions toward healthcare practitioners rather than individual participants could have reduced participant's burden and maximized resources 19 . Sample size estimation was more accurate if including variation in outcome between clusters, precisely, the variance inflation factor or the design effect, defined as 1 + (n − 1)ρ, where n is the average number of subjects per cluster and ρ is the intracluster correlation coefficient (ICC) for a particular outcome 66 . Since outcomes for individuals within any cluster are more likely to be similar, without adjustment for these correlated outcomes, the sample size is underestimated, leading to lower statistical power. Using Gulliford et al.’s data 67 , we calculated the average design effect [1.273 = 1 + (16 − 1) × 0.0182] by applying the average ICC (0.0182) for continuous variables at the postal code sector level from four identical and two related biomarkers. The post hoc estimated sample size at the cluster level was 82, while it was 64 at the individual level (16 in each cluster). Our study’s total number of subjects was 99, which should be adequate to maintain statistical power even for the largest estimated size of 88 (0.0232 ICC 67 and 1.35 design effect) among continuous variables and 90 (0.027 ICC 67 and 1.41 design effect) among binary variables. Our study has several strengths. First, we promoted lifestyle changes by providing a friendly environment and offering special skills with free, easily accessible (within walking distance) exercise classes, nutrition courses, health education, and physical examination to tailor the needs of low-education women to enhance self-efficacy 48 . Second, well-trained community health volunteers who lived inside the community were at an advantage for providing coaching and peer support 68 . They functioned as peer leaders 48 , role models, friends, and shared experiences to reinforce lifestyle changes and overcome barriers, thus in a better position in promoting participants to engage in regular exercise and adopt a healthy diet. Third, operational cost is low because we recruited many community health volunteers and had free access of community activity centers. Forth, the participation rates, compliances, were high, with 100% for nutrition courses, 80% for exercise classes (confirmed with self-reported assessment, see Table 2 ), and 90% for monthly self-monitoring, as approximated by community health volunteers. High subject compliance is critical for successfully translating the benefits of a research trial into practice. On the contrary, extrapolating data from a low-compliance study into practice misleads the benefits of a research trial. Many evidence-based strategies for enhancing compliance have been suggested 69 , 70 . This study’s high compliance rates were likely attributed to the many and various dimensions included. Applying a greater number of behavior change techniques produces higher adherence to physical activity or/and healthy eating, as demonstrated in meta-analyses among patients with chronic musculoskeletal conditions 71 and overweight and obese adults 72 . Group intervention increases adherence rate to physical activity and compliance rate for achieving the recommended physical activity 73 . Time-saving locations, i.e., near participants’ homes, can enhance exercise adherence in center-based interventions 74 . We also offered flexible exercise times, twice a day and 5 days a week, which should have facilitated attendance. Goal setting 72 , feedback on outcomes 72 , 74 , and trust built around participants and neighbored health-support volunteers could influence compliance 75 , 76 . Moreover, high compliance is expected among volunteered participants who tend to be more cooperative and trusting, to have high motivation 73 , family support 73 , and ambulatory ability. Fifth, despite losing certain statistical precision, randomization by clusters has the advantage over simple randomization by individuals. It helps reduce the risk of contamination between intervention and control groups within the same cluster, lower administration cost, and enhance subject compliance. This study had a few limitations. First, compliance rates were indirectly assessed based on observation. Second, satisfaction levels, self-efficacy, or other psychological factors related to study adherence were not assessed. Third, we did not assess nutritional status, unhealthy foods, energy intake, and energy expenditure that would quantify how the changes in body weight, BMI, or biomarkers were related to macronutrients, micronutrients, and physical activity caloric levels. Fourth, we did not prescribe personalized dietary plans or exercise regimens. Non-optimum stimulus (intervention), either too high or too low, is likely causing a dilution effect because of increased variations in participants’ responses. Fifth, behavior assessment, such as diet or physical activity, might have been over-reported due to social desirability. Sixth, Providing printed health education material in the form of a leaflet to the control participants who were stakeholders themselves might have attracted their attention, increased their health awareness, and consequently induced specific lifestyle changes 77 , 78 . In conclusion, low-education women with metabolic syndrome could improve physical activity and healthy eating behaviors and metabolic syndrome risks by learning and administering self-management skills and routines supported by environments and accessible resources of five dimensions—lifestyle modifications, goal setting, coaching and peer support, problem-solving, and self-monitoring provided by nurses and community health volunteers. The implementation of this study can be extended to low-socioeconomic or disadvantaged populations in less developed areas.